# 01 What is Java?

1. What is Java? 17m

## 1. What is Java? 17m

Hello, my name is Aurelio Garcia Ribeyro. Today I'm going to tell you a little bit about what is Java, a brief introduction to the most used development platform in the world. During this presentation, I'll talk about some things that are just planned into the future. Please don't take this as a promise. This is just current plans. It's subject to change.

I will, during this lesson, describe the Java development platform, tell you a bit about the best features, and give you a brief history about which benefits were introduced with each new major release. So about myself, I've been a principal product manager for the Java platform group at Oracle for a while now. I joined Oracle in 2010 through the Sun acquisition, and I've been in the product management team for Java Standard Edition since then.

Before joining Oracle, I was at Sun with the Java product management team for them. I've got an MBA from MIT Sloan and a bachelor's degree in System Engineering from Universidad de Lima. So first, what is Java? Before Sun introduced the development platform, when people talked about Java everybody thought about coffee, or perhaps the most populated island in Indonesia. Now, since then, about 20 years ago, we've added a few more definitions.

Now, when people say Java, some people talk about the programming language, the actual syntax of the language. Other people may refer to it as a software platform, which has some specifications and some different components. And you could also just be talking about the virtual machine which is at the heart of Java. That's the piece of software that enables a computer to run Java bytecode. Now, there's also several additions that one should be aware of.

We have Java Card, which powers those smart cards that you carry around nowadays. You have Java Micro Edition, which is available mostly on cell phones. Java Standard Edition, which is what I'll be talking about now, and Java Enterprise Edition, which adds some multi-tier and client server capabilities for the Standard Edition.

So first, Java as a programming language. Like every language, this just describes the list of valid keywords, the fact that you use curly brackets to enclose your statements, that you finish with a semicolon, and whether you use single quotation or double quotation for strings. And it's just the set of rules that define the field that we now are familiar with when we write Java programs. Then there's the Java Virtual Machine, which is the piece of software that runs Java bytecode.

So when computers first came out, if you wanted to write software you had to write software for the particular instruction set of each computer, which meant that the same program couldn't run on different computers. Each computer comes with a set of instructions, and you have to code individually for those instructions. Now, a big leap forward was the introduction of operating systems that unified these. And now, developers, rather than coding to the actual hardware, just are free to code to the operating system.

Virtual machines like Java introduce one more level of abstraction that allows you to code to a single place and target different operating systems. And by doing so, since we can also provide virtual machines for smaller devices, you can use Java for other things like cards, mobiles, embedded systems like you would find in the entertainment system on a plane, and a whole world of other new applications have opened up.

So some other advantages of using a virtual machine. Without changing anything or redeploying your application, you can get performance improvement. As we update the virtual machine behind it, things just work faster. We can do security updates. We'll patch any security vulnerability that we're aware of. We can add support for new platforms. So without having to re-code, you can support the new version of Windows or Linux that hasn't yet come out, just by installing the new version of JRE to that operating system.

And we also offer enhanced monitoring capabilities, so that we can tell you what your program is doing without you having to instrument it. To understand this a little bit better, let me give you a brief overview of the life of a Java program. It starts with a developer typing, in Java, their program. It's plain text. If you were to open this file, you'd be able to read it. After that, we run it through a compiler, and that will interpret the Java program and write bytecode. So you end up with an equivalent form, but it's now converted into a language that the Java runtime can run.

And after that, you can give the bytecode-- you're going to need more than one class. You probably want to group them all together. We've created a packaging mechanism called JARs, which are just a collection of your own classes already in bytecode. And you can give that to the Java Virtual Machine. So that's, at high level, the life of a Java program. Now, we sometimes talk about the JDK, the Java Development Kit, and sometimes about the JRE, a Java Runtime Environment.

To understand the difference, think about what you would need to run a program. So you have the Java Virtual Machine, and you have a set of standard libraries. And that's common code that a lot of developers have to do, like how to manipulate strings, or connect to a database, or do some arithmetic operations. So we bundle those together, and we deliver that as the Java Runtime Environment. Notice that javac is not included there.

So those are tools that you need to create Java programs. javac and other developer tools, like tools for creating documentation, or for signing your code, that are not needed to run the program but are quite useful to create them, are included with a copy of the Java Runtime into something that we call the Java Development Kit. So if somebody asks, now you know the difference. The Java virtual machine is just that little piece. The Runtime includes some standard libraries.

And that's what most people have in their systems. And then, for developers you include some extra tools. And that's the JDK. Now, to develop in Java you have different choices of integrated development environments. So we have some commercial and free products available. People in my team tend to use Eclipse or NetBeans. A few of them I know use IntelliJ. Oracle developed its own tool, JDeveloper. And there are some others. BlueJ, for example, is geared towards education. So it's a very simple way of learning how to code. And there are several others available for you to choose.

Now, a brief history of Java. The first public demonstration of Oak-- that was the code name of Java before it was called Java-- was done during a TED conference with James Gosling showing a moving 3-D molecule in a browser. At that time, the browsers only showed static text and images. So these blew everybody's mind out. And it got everybody's attention, and it actually opened up their eyes as to what the web could actually become.

A year after that, in 1996, now renamed Java, Java 1 came out. And it introduced three concepts, none of which was new, which were object oriented programming, which was the new paradigm for development back then. Then you had simplified memory management. Before Java, the largest development platform was C, in which users had to take care of memory themselves. With Java, the garbage collection algorithm took care of that. And it freed a lot of developers from some common mistakes. And you had the virtual machine, which I just explained a few minutes ago.

In Java 1.1.1, just a year later, we introduced a Java Beans API and some APIs for connecting to databases. API is Application Programming Interface Java 2, 1.2-- that's when Java was re-branded as Java 2-- introduced foundation classes for graphics-- that's swing and Java 2D-- and introduced the concept of Collections. Java 3, in 2000, introduced HotSpot, which is the name of the JVM, as the default JVM in the runtime environment. And it also introduced the community process 2.0 as the governing body for the Java standard.

With Java 4, we brought in new input/output, and Java Web Start, which allows you to launch a Java application through a web browser, not just run it embedded in the web browser as outputs did before. Java 5 was, at the time, the largest Java release. It introduced generics, annotations, enums, varargs, and something called enhanced for-each each loop. Java 6 in 2006 was the version that was Open Sourced under GNU and saw some significant performance improvements for the core platform, and for Swing, the graphic component.

Java 7 in 2011, notice the large gap, was the first release under Oracle's stewardship. It introduced the first new bytecode since Java 1. We also introduced some minor improvements to the language called Project Coin, and some improvements in concurrency utilities, the fork-join framework. After that, in 2014, we released Java 8, the current version. It introduced Lambda Expressions, which allow us to create a completely different paradigm for the development.

We have Streams API, a shiny New Date and Time API, which superseded one that was perhaps too complicated. And for the first time, we introduced Java Flight Recorder, which is a capability for monitoring your Java programs, previously available only in a competing JVM, which Oracle, before we acquired Sun, had available for its products.

And the next version that we have scheduled, Java 9, which is due on 2017, will modularize the platform with Project Jigsaw. It will allow us to create application-specific runtimes. So rather than having one JRE for every possible application, you could create a custom one which is optimized for your particular application. We'll offer the option of creating multi-release JAR files so that you can have code that will run differently, or different code, for different versions of Java.

We also offer jshell, which is an interactive tool that will allow you to evaluate Java expressions and learn the language without having to go through all of the process of writing, compiling, and then deploying.

Now, a little bit more about Java. Why should I choose Java? First thing, it's really huge. 97% of enterprises out there have desktops running Java. There are around one billion Java downloads each year, and around nine million Java developers worldwide. It's the number one programming language, and there's more than three billion devices powered by Java technology. To put some of these numbers in perspective, if the Java developers were to create a nation, it would be more populated than about half of the countries in the world.

And for those three billion devices, if you assume about five centimeters for each one of them, and you put them side by side, you go around the earth about four times. It's an open standard. Java itself, it's managed by the Java Community Process. So it's not run by any one company. It's a group of companies and individuals that establish the direction and approve any further change to their specification. So we have some names that you may recognize there. Other than Oracle, we have SAP, Redhat, IBM, Apple, HP Twitter, and a large number of individual contributors as well.

What does it mean to you? It means that there is no vendor lock-in. You could choose from Oracle, or from many other vendors. Or you can just go to Open Source directly. And it also means that contributors are welcome. So if you would like to add something to the platform and you have the expertise, we welcome your contribution. It's free for general purpose computers. So you have many advantages that are available. You can deploy it in as many servers and desktops as you want without paying anything.

We also have competitors in the JVM space. So although we collaborate on the specification, and we all agree on what the JVM should do, then we turn around and compete like crazy on the implementation. And that, of course, makes it better for everybody across the board because we push each other. There is the write once, run anywhere statement that we've been using for a long time. It means that the same skills that you use for writing on a server can be used for writing on a mobile, or a client, or even embedded devices.

We do offer support and extra tools. So if you want to build an enterprise-grade solution, you can buy support from Oracle. We offer a much longer timeline than what we make publicly available for free. And we offer some additional tools for people that want to manage Java at scale. You will also find a very large and active developer community that will let you find help, and hire developers, and find solutions to common problems. It has some great performance.

When Java was a really original released more than 20 years ago, the performance was not its main goal, and it was not at the same level as a well written native application. Nowadays, it is much better than a poorly written native application. It's at par in some cases to a native application, and it's much simpler to write a Java program than to write something in native code. As I mentioned, we have the Java virtual machine and the Java language.

There are some people that don't find the Java language answers their needs pretty well. So instead of that, they've created their own languages, which they then compile to bytecode, to Java bytecode that runs on the Java Virtual Machine. So there are many other languages that can also be used that will take advantage of the benefits that I listed from the Java Virtual Machine. And here's just a sample of them, Scala, Groovy, JRuby.

It's also important to know it's backed by Oracle. Even before Oracle purchased Sun, it had developed most of its Fusion Middleware stack in Java. So we have a vested interest in the platform. And as you can see from the roadmap and what we've done so far, we've reinvigorated it, and we foresee a long and bright future for Java. Thank you very much.
