# 2 : JDK 16

1. JDK 16 New Features - New - 6m
2. JDK 16 Features Contd... - New - 8m
3. Constructors for Record Classes - New - 9m
4. Pattern Matching for Instance of - New - 7m
5. Pattern Matching for Instance of Contd.. - New - 4m
6. Packaging Tool - New - 4m
7. Sealed Classes (Preview) - New - 4m
8. Vector API(Incubator) - New - 3m
9. Vector API(Incubator) Contd.. - New - 3m
10. Pattern Matching for Instance of (Demo) - New - 3m

## 1. JDK 16 New Features - New - 6m

This lesson discusses JDK 16 new features. After completing this lesson, you should be able to describe the JDK 16 release model and the new features added in Java SE 16. Let's talk about long term support.

JDKs. A new long term support version is typically released every three years. It is supported by Oracle for personal and commercial use for several years. And what's good about the long term support, it provides a stable set of specifications.

On the slide, we show you the current long term support JDK is JDK 11, which was released in 2018. The next long term support JDK will be released in September 2021. It will be JDK 17. And then the next one will be JDK 23, which will be released in 2024.

But between the long term support JDKs or versions, we do have what we call short term support JDKs. A new short term support version is released every six months. It's typically released either in March or September between the, of course, long term releases. And it is supported by Oracle for six months.

Typically, the short term support have smaller features that are not bottlenecked by larger ones. One big update from SE 8 to SE 9 was the JDK 9. The JDK 9 enhancement, they were so many of them bottlenecked by modularity. The modularity system was introduced in JDK 9, so that's why it contains lots of new features.

This slide shows the target number of enhancement per JDK. As you can see, from JDK 8 to 9, there were a lot of enhancements. And they were fairly new. All introduced in JDK 9. Then after that we had JDK 11, which was a short term release. And then after that we got the JDK 11, which represents the long term support version.

After that we had a few short term support releases, like JDK 12, 13, 14, 15, and of course now, 16. In this lesson, we're going to focus on the new features introduced in JDK 16, which was released just on March 16, 2021.

Sometimes, you might want to ask why to support models. We have the long term support and the short term support. Typically, for the long term support, developers are concerned with, in this case, the stability of the specifications and making sure that their applications created or built or developed using previous decades would work without any problem.

And of course, it has the ongoing support for bugs and security patches. The short term support, on the other hand, it's typically created to get the latest and the greatest sooner, so that developers can try any new features that were introduced in the short term support version.

And typically, these type of versions contain standardized features and preview features. We'll take a look at some of these standardized, in this case, features that were added in JDK 16 and then some of the previous ones that of course either introduced or kept as the second preview and so forth. Preview features are typically used to test and refine specifications before they're standardized.

## 2. JDK 16 Features Contd... - New - 8m

JDK 16 comes with 17 JEPs, 17 JDK Enhancement Proposals, and they are listed in this slide.

In this slide, we divide them into seven groups, the top first two are related to the language features, they are the Pattern Matching for instanceof. The pattern matching allows a common logic in a program, namely the condition extraction of components from objects to be expressed more concisely and safely. The other one, Records, records provide the compact syntax for declaring classes which are transparent holders for immutable data.

The first two are related to the enhancement in the JVM, and they are the ZGC Concurrent Thread Start Processing, this move the ZGC Thread Start Processing from safepoints to a concurrent phase. The other one is the Elastic Metaspace, allows return unused HotSpot class-metadata, like the metaspace memory, to the operating system more promptly, reducing metaspace footprint.

The other two are related to libraries and tools and they are the Unix-Domain Socket Channel, which basically a-- for local and inter-process communication, and Unix-Domain sockets are both more secure and more efficient than TCP/IP loopback connections. The Packaging Tool is used for packaging self-contained Java applications. They support native packaging formats to give end users a natural installation experience, and these formats include msi and exe for Windows, pkg and dmg on macOS, and Deb and RPM for Linux.

There's two related to the future proofing, the Strongly Encapsulate JDK Internals by default, and the Warning for Value-Based Classes.

Then you have the fifth group is a four later releases, these are incubators and previews, and they are Sealed Classes, the Vector API, the Foreign Linker API, the Foreign Memory Access API.

And the last group is for open JDK Developers and they are Enable C++14 Language Feature in JDK source code, Migrate from Mercurial to Git, Migrate to GitHub, Alpine Linux Port, and Windows/Aarch64 Port.

Let's now discuss Records.

The intention of these Records is to devise an object-oriented construct that expresses a simple aggregation of values. Basically, they help developers to focus on modeling immutable data rather than extensible behavior. What's good about records is that they implement data-driven methods such as equals and accessors automatically for you, and they preserve the long-standing Java principle such as a nominal typing and a migration compatibility. That's the beauty about that.

So the motivation behind this is that, quite often, we complain about the Java that is "too verbose" and "has too much ceremony." We know that some of the worst offenders are classes that are nothing more than immutable data carriers for a handful of values. And typically, when we write these classes, we have to implement the error-prone type of, in this case, constructors, and accessors, and equals, and hashCode, and toString, and so forth, and getters and so forth. So a good example that shows us how these writing a-- or using a regular class, can be sometimes too verbose is the next example that we are going to see in the next slide.

Here's a very good example. In the example, we have a class called Point, and as you see it has a couple of fields there, final x and y, they are of type int, and then it has a constructor, and then you have to implement the equals method, and you have to implement the hashCode and the toString and the getter methods, basically all of these-- or the accesses if you want, all of this will be a lot of typing. Ah, we can say that this can be implemented quite easily through an IDE, yes, but the issue that we have with this is that the maintainability-- once you start maintaining it, it basically becomes a headache. So that's why, to simplify things, we got into-- we introduced Records.

Record classes are a new kind of classes in Java language, and what they do is the record classes-- rather, they're very useful because record classes help us model plain data and aggregate them with less ceremony than normal classes. So-- and the record declaration specifies in a header description of its content.

So all the appropriate accesses, and constructors, and equal, and hashCode, and the toString method are all created automatically for you by the JVM, that's the beauty about it.

So record's fields are final because the class is intended to serve as a simple "data carrier." And the way you write it is quite simple. We see the example here on the slide, basically that's all what you write in this case.

So think about it. Think about the difference between in this case, what we've seen in the previous slide, we see is a whole class with the constructor, and the implementation of the equals method, the hashCode, the toString, and the getter methods or the accessors methods. Instead, you just write it as you can see here in this example, record Point and you're parsing two, in this case parameter two with x and y, the int, and then open the curly brace close the curly brace, and you're good to go. The appropriate accessors, constructors, equal, hashCode, toString methods are created automatically for you, that's the beauty about that.

## 3. Constructors for Record Classes - New - 9m

Let's look at the Constructors for Record Classes. The rules for constructors in a regular class are different from those in a normal class. A normal class without any constructor declarations is automatically given a default constructor, we know about that. On the other hand, a record class without any constructive declaration is automatically given a canonical constructor that assigns all the private fields to the corresponding arguments of the new expression that instantiated the record.

On the left side, we see an example where we have a record Point that takes two full parameter x and y, which are int, this is compiled as if it were the code that you see below, record Point with implicitly declared fields x and y, other implicit declarations elided here, and implicitly declared canonical constructor that you see.

Here's an example of a compact canonical constructor that validates its implicit parameters, it's called range. Takes on lo and hi as int. And as you see, you have inside that range, they have an if statement, lo is greater than hi, this referring here to the implicit constructor parameters.

The example of a canonical constructor that normalizes its formal parameters is represented as the code in the middle, rationale that takes a num and denom. And as you see over there, we do the normalization in that constructor, which is equivalent to the conventional constructor that you see below, that would be in the bottom. OK, where you handle the normalization inside the constructor rational.

So the canonical constructor may be declared explicitly with a list of formal parameters that match the record header, as we've seen in the previous slide.

It may also be declared more compactly by omitting the list of a formal parameters.

In such a compact canonical constructor, the parameters are declared implicitly, and the private fields corresponding to the record components can be, rather cannot be assigned in the body but are automatically assigned to the corresponding formal parameters at the end of the constructor.

Let's now discuss some rules about the record classes. Well a record glass declaration does not have an extends clause. The superclass of a record class is always Java.lang.Record.

So a record class is implicitly final and cannot be abstract. These restrictions emphasize that the API of a record class is defined solely by its state description and cannot be enhanced later by another class.

Another thing is the fields derived from the record components are final.

And a record class cannot explicitly declare instance feeds and cannot contain instance initializers.

Of course, any explicit declaration of a member that would otherwise be automatically derived must match the type of the automatically derived member exactly, disregarding any annotations on the explicit declaration.

And a record class cannot declare native methods.

More of these rules for record classes. We also tell you that instances of record classes are created using new expression, kind of similar to the classes. And there record class can be declared top level or nested and can be genetic. We see examples of our generic in the next slide.

And a record class can declare static methods, fields, initializers. Now we should not forget that record class can declare instance methods.

And of course, a record class can implement interfaces. You'll see an example later on. One thing that we should know is that the record class cannot specify a superclass since that would mean inherited states beyond the state described in the header.

And of course, a record class can declare nested types, including nested record classes. We'll see an example little on. And a record class, and the components in its header, may be decorated with annotations. We have another example about that in the next slides.

Instances of record classes can be serialized and deserialized, but the process cannot be customized by using writeObject, readObject, and so forth.

Let's take a look at now some features of the record classes. Record classes are implicitly final, so you cannot explicitly extend a record class. We know about that, part of the rules. But beyond these restrictions, record classes behave like normal classes. You can create a generic record class, we see this in the top example, record Triangle C extends Coordinate, C top, C left, C right.

You can also declare a record class that implements one or more interfaces, we see an example, that would be in the middle, the record Customer that implements Billable, as an example.

And you can also annotate a record class and its individual components, and we see an example here about the-- in this case, the annotations, that's in the below-- in this case, the bottom example.

We also mentioned that we can work with local records. So a local record is similar to a local class. It's a record class defined in the body of a method. Here we see a very good example. This example, we have a merchant which modeled as a record class called Merchant, and what do we want to do is use an aggregation of a merchant and monthly sales, which is in this case, we model it with a local record called, MerchantSales.

And as you see in the code, we do have a method called findTopMerchant, Merchants, that will return a list of merchants. Takes a list of merchants and in a month, and then of course, we use a local record here, which is the merchant sales, which is made of the merchant and the sales, that would be a record class. And then of course, we use a [? lambda ?] expression code over there, where we take the list of, in this case, of the merchants, convert to string, apply a map, in the map and [INAUDIBLE] be-- we'll go ahead and create an instance of the merchant sales, we do the sorted, and apply the map, and then of course, collect that to a list.

## 4. Pattern Matching for Instance of - New - 7m

Let's take a look now at the pattern matching for instance of. The pattern matching for instance of allows common logic in a program, namely for conditional extraction of components for objects to be expressed more concisely and safely.

Let's see an example. We all have seen code like this. Well, in this case, we're doing three things. We, first, are trying to check if the object obj is an instance of string. OK. If this is true, then in this case, go ahead and declare s a variable of type or reference variable of that string. And then cast the object into a string and assign it to s and then use s.

With pattern matching for instance of, we can convert that into only one statement inside the if. So here, we just write it obj instance of string s and what happened here is that the obj object is checked if it's an instance of string.

If it is, then that variable s that we added in the if statement now will be automatically converted into a string and we can go ahead and use it.

Now, if we have an else block, then s would be out of the scope inside the else block. So the pattern matching for instance of can be used also in complex conditional statements. Here's an example, where here, we are using an end in the conditional statement.

So here, we are checking if the object obj is instance of the string s. If it is true, then we'll go ahead and check the length of the s. So as you see, if the first condition is true, then s is in the scope inside the second condition and the code in the block.

Here's an example-- we use the or, here, if object obj is not an instanceof string, so if that falls, then s will be out of the scope because there is no way s now in this case, because we said that it has to be true, so that s will be cast into a string, otherwise you cannot use it. So in this case, s is not defined in the-- after the or, in this case a operator. And if you try to use the s, then you get an error saying that you cannot find symbol.

Now, let's take a look at an example. Consider again the code that calculates the perimeter of a certain shape. So here we have an interface called shape, it has a method called getPerimeter that takes a shape a perimeter of shape, and then of course, inside the code of the getPerimeter we check, if the shape is an instanceof a rectangle, then what we do is we cast the shape into a rectangle and assign it to that reference variable r of type rectangle, and use it. S if the shape is an instanceof a circle, then we go out and take that shape, cast it into a circle, and assign it to a reference variable c of type, in this case circle, and use it.

This is the first part of the code. In the second part here, in the second part here, we have the class rectangle implements shape, and then the class circle implements shape interface. Now, of course, the getPerimeter method here is used without the pattern matching for instanceof.

Now, what we want to do is we want to now use the pattern matching for an instanceof inside the getPerimeter method. So we know that the getPerimeter method performed first of all a bunch of steps. First, it tests to determine the type of the shape object, and then a conversion on casting of shape object would be to rectangle or circle, depending on the result of the instanceof operator. And then of course, a destructuring, extracting either the length and the width or radius from the shape object.

So if now we wanted to use the pattern matching for instanceof, now we can see that the pattern matching enables us to remove the conversion steps by changing the second operator of the instanceof operator with a type pattern, again making your code shorter and easier to read, and here is now what you see in the code.

So we have the getPerimeter method that takes a shape, and as you see here, we used the pattern matching for instanceof. So we have shape instanceof rectangle r-- we see that variable, reference variable r, but we added inside the if statement. And then, of course, this will automatically check if the shape is an instanceof rectangle then r is automatically cast into a rectangle, and then we use it. S if the shape is an instance of circle c, then the same thing, if it's true, then c is automatically cast into a circle, and then you can use it.

## 5. Pattern Matching for Instance of Contd.. - New - 4m

Continuing with Pattern Matching for instanceof, let's talk about Scope of Pattern Variables.

Now we typically say that the scope of a pattern variable are the places where the program can reach only if the instanceof operator is true.

Let's see the example of the getPerimeter method that takes a shape as a form parameter. If the shape is an instance of rectangle s, then we can use the pattern variable s of type rectangle here. Else, if the shape is an instance of a circle s, then you can use the pattern variable s of type circle in that else block, the first one, but not the pattern variable s of that rectangle.

Else, in the last else, you cannot use either pattern available here, you cannot use one of the rectangle and you cannot use the one of the circle.

Now the scope of a pattern variable can extend beyond the statement that introduced it. Here's an example, well in this case, we have a method called bigEnoughRect, but takes a shape, return a Boolean. Here we have a not, so if not s, or if s, is not an instanceof rectangle r, you cannot use the pattern variable r, because the predicate s instanceof Rectangle is false, so that returns false.

Outside the if bloc, you can use r in this case.

Continue with the scope of pattern variables, you can now-- we have a summary where we specify you can use a pattern variable in the expression of an if statement.

Here we have a shape as an instanceof a Rectangle r and r.length is greater than 5, then here of course, in this case, if because of the conditional-AND operator, and we know that it's a short-- it is short circuiting, then the program can reach the r.length greater than 5 expression, only if the instanceof operator is true. Only if shape is an instanceof Rectangle r.

Conversely, you can't pattern match with the instanceof operator in the situation with the or that you see below. If the shape is an instanceof Rectangle r or r.length greater than 0, this of course would give an error, if, for example, shape instanceof Rectanlge is false.

So the program here can reach the r.length, in this case, if the instanceof is false, thus, you cannot use the parameter variable r in this case.

## 6. Packaging Tool - New - 4m

Let's take a look at the Packaging Tool.

The Packaging Tool is used for packaging self-contained Java application. So the jpackage tool packages a Java application into a platform-specific package that includes all the necessary dependencies.

It supports native packaging formats to give and uses a natural installation experience. These formats include deb and rpm for Linux, pkg and dmg for Mac OS, and msi and exe for Windows.

By default, jpackage produces a package in the format most appropriate for the system on which it is run.

Let's see some basic usage. Suppose you have an application composed of a jar files all in the directory named lib. And the main jar files is in the lib contains the main class. So the command to use for jpackage will be j, that would be the first one, and that the Non-modular application jpackage --name myapp --input lib --main -jar and then the main.jar.

Now, if the manifest file in the main jar does not have the main class attribute, then you must specify the main class explicitly, this would be the second one, the second example, jpackage --name myapp --input lib --main -jar main.jar --main -class main myapp.Main.

Now, if used to produce a package in a format other than the default, then you use the --type option. In the last third example, under the Non-modular application, we see we produce a package file rather than a dmg file on Mac OS. So we have jpackage --name mypackage --input lib --main-jar main.jar file --type pkg.

Now, let's take a look at the basic uses for Modular applications. If you have a Modular application composed of a modular jar file, and/or a jmode file in a library directory with the main class in the module myapp, then you use the first command under the Modular application jpackage, --name myapp --module-path lib and myapp.

Now, if the myapp module does not identify its main class, then again you must specify that explicitly, and we see that in the last example. The last under the Modular application basic usage, jpackage --name myapp --module-path lib -m myapp/myapp.Main.

## 7. Sealed Classes (Preview) - New - 4m

Let's take a look at sealed classes which are still under preview, the second preview under JDK 16. Sealed classes interfaces restrict which other classes or interfaces may extend or implement them, and allow the author of a class or interface to control which code is responsible for implementing it, and provide a more declarative way than access modifiers to restrict the use of a superclass.

So it basically supports future directions in pattern matching by underpinning the exhaustive analysis of patterns. And it uses sealed key word and permits. Let's see an example. Here we do have a class shape or happen to be abstract and it's sealed. But it permits circle and rectangular square to extend it.

So now we can go ahead and create a circle class. And we made it final, which means it extends shape, but no other class will extend circle. Or we can create a class like, for example, rectangle that extends shape, because the sealed shape permits a rectangle to extend it. But then this time, the rectangle will made sealed, which means it has its own a classes that are permitted to extend it, in this case, transparent rectangle and filled rectangle.

Now continuing with this example on the right side, you will see that the transparent rectangle now we decided that it's going to be final. And it extends rectangle. And it's permitted to extend rectangle, because we wrote it on the left side, the bottom left side where we said a sealed class rectangle extends shape and permits transparent rectangle and filled rectangle.

Now we decided that transparent rectangle is going to be final, which means no other class will extend it. And the filled rectangle we also decided it going to be a final, and as you see, the extended rectangle. On the other hand, we made square and non-sealed a class that extends shape.

So one thing that we should remember here is that exactly one of the modifiers-- final, sealed, or non-sealed must be used by each permitted classes. It is not possible for a class to be both sealed and final, or both non-sealed and final, or both sealed and non-sealed.

## 8. Vector API(Incubator) - New - 3m

Let's take a look at the last topic in this lesson, which is the Vector API, which is an incubator in JDK 16.

The Vector provide an initial iteration of an API to express vector computations that reliably compile at runtime to optimal vector hardware instructions on supported CPU architectures, and thus achieve superior performance to equivalent scalar computations. So basically, it expresses the vector computations that compile a runtime to optimal vector hardware and structures.

And it allows taking advantage of the SIMD instructions available on most modern CPUs, and allows developers to write complex vector algorithms in a Java, a highly mathematical computations.

We see an example on the left side, and that's a VectorSpecies that Float SPECIES. So in this example, a SPECIES for 256-bit wide vectors or floats is obtained from the float vector, and this SPECIES is stored in a static final field, so the runtime compiler will treat the field's value as a constant, and therefore be able to better optimize the vector computation.

Of course, the vector computation features a main loop kernel iterating over the arrays in a slides of vector length. And we have the static method from array, but loads the flawed vectors of the given SPECIES from arrays A and B at the corresponding index. Then the operations are performed and fluently, and of course. And finally, the result is sold into the array C.

## 9. Vector API(Incubator) Contd.. - New - 3m

Let's take a look now at a demo. In this demo, I create a record called employee that takes in this case a parameters ID which is an integer, first name and last name which are strings, a salary, which is double, and hire date, which is the local date. Then I create a regular class called EmployeeC that has these final feeds-- ID, first name, last name, salary, and hire date similar to the one of the record.

And then I implemented the constructor and to get our methods to return the ID, first name, last name, salary, and hire date. Implement the equals method, and implement the hashCode method and the string method. OK. Because it's a regular, normal class.

Then I created a method. And I create two instances. One is an instance of an employee record called employee record, with of course the formal parameters that applies here. And then I print it out. And then I create a new instance of the regular class EmployeeC called employee class, plus also the same type of parameters and print it out.

Let's go ahead and run this. So here, I do have my JDK 16 installed. I did compile all the examples. And now I'm going to go ahead in this case and run the example of the employee. So you see if I run it, I get the output here. This is a record as you see here. OK.

And this is the a class-- the object of type class EmployeeC. So I see the only difference that you see here is that the record-- it prints the record with the square brackets. But when I implemented, in this case, the toString method, I use the curly braces. OK. And as you see here, you see the output here. Thank you.

## 10. Pattern Matching for Instance of (Demo) - New - 3m

Let's take a look now at a demo about pattern matching for instanceof. Here, I created a class called pattern instanceof as a main method, I declare a number n and assign 2d to it, double. And then here, I have some code that basically uses some condition statements.

If n is an instanceof double d, then go ahead and print that double d. If it's n is an instanceof an integer, then I'll go ahead and print, in this case add the integer d. And then if it's an instanceof a long integers, then I'll go ahead and print the long integer d. Otherwise, I print an object. OK. So here, let's go ahead and try this.

So I already installed my JDK 16. And I already compiled the pattern instance of class. And now what I'm going to do is run it. So as you can see, the output is double d. And that's exactly what I have in the code here. So because is a 2 d double.

Then when it went through this code, it did check that n is an instance of double d. And that's why it printed in this case, the value d which happened to be double value. And that's exactly what we see here as an output. Thank you.
