# 1: Introduction

1. Introduction - 31m

# 1. Introduction - 31m

OK. Let's go ahead and start with the JavaScript and HTML5 Develop Web Applications course. We will start with the first lesson. And the first lesson is pretty much the introduction. So in this course, pretty much we are going to cover a few nice topics related to the JavaScript and HTML developing web applications where we will talk of the JavaScript API and the typical Javascript programming language. We will get also into HTML5. And we'll discuss that too. And also, we will get into CSS and discuss it also extensively. And, of course, finish with the JQuery.

So the typical audience for this course is pretty much for programmers who want to build web applications by using JavaScript, HTML5 and CSS. CSS stands for cascade style-- cascading; for web designer, and of course, the web designers who want to expand their skills to create interactive web pages by using JavaScript; and of course Java programmers who want to start developing web applications by using the Java EE platform, which is the Java Enterprise platform.

So in terms of the prerequisites to successfully completing this course, it is a good idea to have a basic programming experience and basic web knowledge. In terms of the course objectives, we would build web applications by using JavaScript, HTML5, and CSS. We start through the introduction of the JavaScript where we code the application logic with JavaScript and to create interactive content. And in this course, we will divide the JavaScript lessons, or if you want, concept, into three lessons so that we can learn pretty much in a step by step. And we're going to design some HTML5 documents to present data and display user interfaces. And of course, we are going to add CSS to documents to create appealing design for your web applications.

This is pretty much an introduction. I assume that you're doing something. Now, in terms of the web applications, web applications have a tendency to come in many different forms. You could have simple static type of web pages, just a static web page that gives you some information. It could be a single page application, where you just have a page that pretty much allows you to interact with the application. But we can also have quite interesting types of pages where you're most probably going to have some animated pages with JavaScript. You could have interactive pages where now the user can interact with the application through different pages. That would be getting maybe the login page to log in into your application, and then after that, maybe filling [INAUDIBLE] page or filling up a form so you can submit that form, and so forth, and getting results back from the application and so forth.

In general, a web application could be just games based on HTML5. They could be forms to request user data, where the user will enter the data through the form to the application so that the application can use that data to, of course, process the request for the user. So example of different web applications could be maybe a weather page. That would be a weather web page that would give you the weather. Or it would be an Oracle portal. That also would be a good example of a web application.

In terms of the course road map, we will pretty much cover, as you see here, the first day we will do an introduction and then get into the web application essentials, then after that get into JavaScript and fundamentals. That's where I said we introduced the JavaScript programming language. In day number two, we get into a document object model. That's where we tackle a little bit of the document object model for HTML5 and then get into the JavaScript API. This would be the next step in the JavaScript. So that's why I said at the beginning that we divide the learning about JavaScript into three different lessons.

And then, of course, we look at the application data. Where would we save the data on the client side? That would be in the browser. And you will see that there are quite interesting new features that actually we can use when it comes to application data or saving the application data or storing the application data.

Day number three, we get into a style application we CSS 3. That would be the cascading style sheet. And we'll get into the details of CSS. And then we get into the third lesson of JavaScript which covers advanced topics on JavaScript. We call it advanced JavaScript.

And day number four, we get into dynamic data with AJAX and WebSockets. Pretty much over there we discuss the AJAX technology and WebSocket technology. And then we finish the course by looking at how we develop application with JQuery.

So this would be day number one where we get into basically-- we discuss a little bit of the environment setup. And then in Lesson 2, we get into the web application essentials, where we can make use of demos to show you that, while, of course, lecturing. And then, of course, we get to do some practices. That would be good, you know, and building web applications and so forth. And so that would be interesting. And we'll get to actually try some of these nice practices to learn the concept of web application essentials.

And then after that, we get into the Java programming language. That's where we pretty much are going to write JavaScript. And we do have a very, very nice cloud application that we use to allow you to pretty much practice how to write JavaScript.

In Lesson 4, we combine HTML5 and JavaScript. That's where we discuss the concept of the DOM, a model with JavaScript. And we do have practices on that too. We'll discuss them. In lesson number 5, you know, that's where we discuss the JavaScript API. We do have also practices to create some examples like a bell and a tip calculator, and so forth. So we take a look at that.

Lesson number 6, we deal with the application data. That's where we see where we save the user information, in this case, on a browser. So you'll see that. Typically, of course, we'll use it for the bill and the tip calculator. But, you know, we'll discuss it in general.

In Lesson number 7, we'll look at the styling and how we style application using CSS3. That's pretty much where we're going to learn about styling elements will CSS3. And we do have also nice practices for those, for that lesson. And then in Lesson number 8, we're going to look at some advanced JavaScript concepts. And then, of course, we get to actually do practices on them too, using the concept or kind of getting also into the creating in HTML canvas or HTML5 canvas application.

In Lesson number 9, we take a look at the dynamic data with JavaScript using AJAX and WebSockets. This pretty much also is an interesting type of lesson, where we learn about how do we create dynamic AJAX applications and also how to create WebSocket games as an example. And then, of course, we finish by looking JQuery and see how we can use JQuery to develop applications in this case.

So the way, basically, we are going to learn this course, ladies and gentlemen, is we get into the slides that I'm looking at. And then we get into examples. And then we'll ask you to do some practices. Those practices could be on a cloud application, which is called a JConsole application, and we show you how to connect to it through the browser, or using the NetBeans IDE.

So in terms of the lectures, like I mentioned, we get into it the slides and we talk about the theory and all of that. Then, of course, we use examples to kind of demo the code sample to understand the theory that we learn. This would be by running all of that inside the JConsole application, which is a JConsole web application-- and lot of times we also call it the cloud application-- that basically allows us to try different examples. And then we assign to you exercises that you are going to do.

So let's just take a look at this JConsole, your pretty much application. So this pretty much web application is used in our course and is basically designed specifically for our course. And you connect to it. Once you're assigned a practice, in this case, machine, or a lab machine, or a practice environment, you will connect to it through HTTP://localhost:8080/JSConsole. And don't forget that it's case sensitive, like in this case, capital J, capital S, and capital C. And we'll take a look at that. In fact, let me just take a look at it. And here's the environment.

So you folks are going to connect to the environment using a username and Oracle and a password. And once you are in the environment, this environment basically contains-- it has all the necessary software installed for you from the IDE to the browser to the server that runs the cloud application that we use to see examples about the different lessons that we are going to learn and, of course, a way also to do your practices in this case. Practices could be on the JConsole itself. Or it could be, in our case here, it would be the JConsole that you folks are going to, in this case, try, which is this one here.

And as you see here, you just connect it. By the way, the way you connect with this-- let me just go ahead and close this and try it again in front of you. So all what you do in this case is you open the browser, which happens to be the Firefox browser. And then you just click on the bookmark and go down to the bookmark toolbar. And then you will see that you can actually choose it, in this case. And we already bookmarked it. It's called JavaScript Console.

You can get it through this or you can get it through the recently, which would be the first one here, Recently Bookmarked. If you click on it, that basically gets you, in this case, into your application, which basically this cloud application, that allows us to look at different examples and also allows you to actually do some of the practices. Because some of the practices that we are going to give you will be on in this JConsole. And some of them will be on the IDE. That's basically what it is.

Let me go ahead and start again, continue with the lesson. So the JConsole tutorial basically contains examples, you know, for every single lesson. And the idea is to show you basically different modes that the JConsole has. So, again, this would be the list that we have, and I showed you this, in this case, as you see here, in the JConsole. And you see these are examples related to the first lesson. And then these are, you know, the second lesson and so forth, third lesson and so forth. And we look at these.

So continuing with our slides, here's pretty much the JConsole overview. So you are going to open an example. And we can open any one. And what's good about this nice application is that it has different buttons that allow you to do different things. And then it has an editor. It has a console output to see the output inside.

So here on the top, you have the tab that tells you about the different files that you have. And you can open. You have the Back that gets you back to the list. You have Run, if you want to run your code. You have the eye, in this case, representing the info. You have this also, a button that allows you to view a solution. All the exercises that we give you, we give you a solution for them, of course. You try your exercise, and then after that, you can go ahead and compare it to the solution.

And then we have the Revert File. The Revert is quite interesting. What it does, it allows you-- if you try it, for example. Let's assume you get into the example that we gave you, and you want to change a few things, just to see how it works, you can go ahead and do that. And then if you want to revert everything to the original or to the original state of the example that we gave you, just click on this Revert File button, and it will get you back to the original version of the example. And even in the exercises that you try, you can go ahead and do that too.

And then, of course, on the right side here, you have how you can preview. And sometimes we give you instructions. And also, you can preview the output of whatever you're creating over there. Lots of times, you know, when it's HTML5, you can see that, including the CSS and so forth. You can see all that, preview on that page. You can also run your code from here. You can clear the console, if you want to clear it. You can also run it in a new window if you want to. And we'll try these later on.

So if you want to look at this, inside your example, so I can go ahead and look at this JavaScript example. I click on it, and you see pretty much here we have nothing but a console.log, which cannot output, in this case. As you see, the whole thing, whatever we pass through the log-- whatever we pass, in this case, to the log between parentheses here, we passed a bunch of, in this case, strings, and between, in this case, double codes, and we can go ahead and get them out. I can go ahead and clear the console, and then I can run. I have a way to run my, in this case, application-- right here, my code. Or I could run it from here. If I run it from here, pretty much I can see the output here on the console.

I can go ahead and change this. For example, in this case, just for the fun of it, I can say, hi there, as an example. And then I can clear my console and run it. And as you see here, the output now is "hi there." But then again, you know, if I want to put it back to its original state, all what I'm going to do is just click on the Revert button. And it says, are you sure you want to revert the file? And say, OK. And boom, now it has its original data, in this case.

So here, we don't have any HTML5 yet. So I don't need to run it in a new window, because it won't give me anything at this point in time. So we'll take a look at that at some point in time. And I can go back here. I can do back here. And that gets me back. Sometimes also you can click on this and that gets you back to over there.

So here's an editor where you can put some information, "hello world" here. And you can pretty much-- and here, we do have, in this case, some HTML file that we ran. If you take a look right here, you will see here's the index.html5 that produces this type of information here. And it's still, by the way, a, in this case, output, "hello world," because that's what we are passing through the log function, in this case, of the console.

And we can go back and here is a web editor. This pretty much does have, in this case, an example where in this case, we do have an HTML5 and we have some JavaScript code here that just prints an output to the console. And then we have some CSS. The CSS is just telling us that-- when we get into the CSS lesson, we learn about all of these different types of syntax that we have here. And so I can do a Control-Plus just to make it slightly bigger so you guys can see. And so you have the body where you have a font family, and we're going to learn about borders and margins and so forth, paddings and so forth. We're going to learn about all of that.

And here, it actually gives us this information, or rather, this information that we see here. So usually the HTML5 always starts with the exclamation doctype. And we will learn about that when we get there. This is telling the browser that is HTML5. And then it's HTML that has the HTML root tag. And then you have the head tags that contain some information about the header information. And then you have the body that contains [INAUDIBLE] that the body here has some paragraphs that we are writing over there. It has a title, h1, that you see here. And that's called the web editor. And that's what we see here.

Now, because it's in HTML5, in this case, a file, we can now run it into a new window. If I run it to a new window, we see it opens now a new browser window that pretty much is just another tab that shows us a final, in this case, rendering of the page that we have here. That's basically. So you could run that in a new window.

So you get to do that sometimes in your practices, and of course, when you look at examples also. And let's go back. And you also have a text editor. And a text editor allows you to test a few things. For example here, you now have a, You set to true. Set the variable to true, that is good. But then b is set to false and c is set to false. That's why you see here, set the variable to true.

So let's go ahead and set them to true and see what happens. So this is how we actually test your application. So let's go ahead and write true here. And then we do the same thing here, and we go ahead and write true here. And then if I now run it, I should be able to have all, in this case, the tests to be all passed.

So the first one passed because it's the set variable, in this case, to true. But then the second one failed because it was set to false. And the third one also failed because it was, in this case, set to false. If I now run it again, you will see that it shows that all of them have passed, as you see here. So this is one way to test your practices later on. And let's go ahead and go back now. And so pretty much we've seen-- and by the way, just going back to the exercise that we were doing here, so you have the preview here. And you have the instruction set that says, to make all tests in the space pass, set all the variables to true. Variable a is already set to true.

OK. So that's what they mean by that. And then this is the preview. And that's exactly what we've done. We changed b and c. We set them to true. And now we see that all tests on all the three cases, all if you want, the three variables all passed. OK, and that's basically what we have.

Let's go back. And continuing with our lesson, so that's pretty much what we show you here. It's pretty much the JConsole overview that I discussed with you right now. So, of course, a first practice here, we're going to cover using NetBeans to create and edit files, create a web application or modify applications to add functionality, running an application inside a browser, and, of course, debugging by using some NetBeans, in this case. So we get to a try this practice. And this is pretty much allowing us to open NetBeans.

So let's go ahead and try that. So I'm going to minimize this. And then I'll go ahead and right click and open NetBeans. Go ahead and open NetBeans. So now the NetBeans IDE is open. And, of course, this IDE is quite powerful. It allows you also to work with JavaScript, and CSS, and HTML5 and so forth.

So at the beginning, when you open it, it takes a little bit of time. So whenever you open it the first time, it says, you agree and all that. Pretty much you can I say no thank you, because you do not want to interact. This is just for the labs. And we don't want to end up updating, all kind of things. There's no point of doing that.

And so the first page would be the Start page. You just click on the X and close it. And now you have your NetBeans. You can go ahead and open any project. Later on you're going to create projects. But, you know, we can always look at the labs and open-- let me see, is there any-- yeah. So there is an activity here. But let's just open one example, in this case, of the-- so at some point in time, we'll start that. So let me just open it, in this case, under my-- so here's an example. This is the example that you are going to do later on in Lesson 2.

So you will get to create a JavaScript file. And you will get to create a CSS file. And, of course, you have a couple of-- HTML1 is the index.html. And the other one is about dot html. And we'll take a look at that later on. So this is also, just to show you the environment of NetBeans and how you work with it, but we'll get to try this later on when we do the practices.

So that's basically what I wanted to share with you. Now continuing, of course, the assignments are additional practices of the material that we give you. Try to complete assignments before the next class if you want, just to kind of, A, you know, reinforce your knowledge-- that's what it is-- before you get to the next lesson. Assignments can be completed at home whenever. And of course, research any important documents online and get all the information.

So the course environment, like I mentioned-- I already shared that with you-- we do have a lab machine that we give you. It has NetBeans installed-- Firefox, Chrome. And in the resources, we have a Student Guide, an Activity Guide already in the machine, by the way. And you can go ahead and then practice files and examples, you know, and interactive quizzes. And then on the back end, we do have a GlassFish app. So that's actually the one that runs our cloud application, which is JConsole and JDK8, which is already installed.

So going back to our practice machine, all of this is installed. If you can actually right-click on your computer and click Browse, and then once you click Browse, click on Oracle. And then you see here we do have already-- we assume that you are going to download your Student Guide and Activity Guide, but you still can open these, Student Guide and Activity Guide, in this case, from inside the machine. Sometimes we can do that just to copy and paste a few things. And so we open now soon. And that would be-- here it is. So it just opened. And then, of course, you can get into any lesson later on. That's basically what it is.

And you get into any lesson and look at any type of examples, you know. Once we get into CSS and all that, we're going to make use of some of the examples that we would carefully copy and paste and put them inside, in this case, our JConsole. We'll show you that later on.

So this is what you get in this case. Plus in addition, if you go one level up and another level up, you also get into the labs. You have your activities and solutions to every one of them. Now this typically is a folder you don't see. This actually belongs to the instructor. And it has only just resources that we share with you, of course, in this case to teach you. So that's basically the environment that I wanted to share with you.

So the demos that we're going to do, they're using your classroom computer, in this case your lab machine that they gave you. In your case, it would be a lab that you connect to and work with. And it would be a remote workstation, and it has the live file locations. And of course, it has the JConsole tutorial that I mentioned to you.

So in summary, this lesson pretty much would have viewed the course objectives and the class schedule, and of course, pretty had a discussion about what's next to do. The self assignment here is it would be nice to install your NetBeans on your lab machine and download and install the latest IDE with HTML support. That's what you need to do. In that case, it's pretty much straight forward. Let me just show you that in the environment. Of course, you're going to do it in your practice. Or even better, let me go ahead and open my browser on the machine. This would be the local machine that I use to show you my slides.

And then if you go, in this case, just kind of Google, and from there, you just look for NetBeans. And you should be able to find it. Or you can also do a search here. And that also would allow you to, in this case, connect and get to NetBeans. So you can go ahead and just look up NetBeans. And then you get just to there. And then from there, you can go ahead and download your NetBeans. Click on Download. And here you have a choice where you want to download.

In general, if you want to download that, the IDE that has everything, this one here, all the way to the right, has everything, as you see here. So if you download this, pretty much you get everything. That's what it means. And that's pretty much what I wanted to say about the first lesson. Thank you.
