# 4: Combining HTML5 and JavaScript in Web Applications

1. Combining HTML5 and JavaScript in Web Applications - 47m
2. JavaScript and HTML5: Develop Web Applications Ed 1 - 14m

## 1. Combining HTML5 and JavaScript in Web Applications - 47m

In lesson four, we're going to discuss the combination of HTML5 and JavaScript in web applications. Pretty much what we do here is we are going to create HTML documents, create HTML5 forms to request information and process it, validate HTML5 forms, write JavaScript functions for HTML5 events, and manipulate HTML5 elements through DOM. So let's take a look at the HTML5 documents. Well, here's an example of an HTML5 documents. And by the way, before that, let me just, in this case, just show you an example of pretty much just some slides telling a little bit about how this HTML5 came into the picture and got created.

So HTML5 is the new proposed next standard for HTML5. pretty much features promote pretty much the rich internet applications. It was pioneered in 2004, first working spec in 2008, working draft 2010, and then since then, pretty much we got a good one also in 2014. And then of course now, a lot of additions were added to it with many different companies worked on it and developers worked on it.

And it's really a mixture of HTML and JavaScript API. That's what it is. And of course, browsers now can make use of it, many different browsers. And it's not really a more or less-- it's like a de facto type of standard. But it's not really the official standard yet. But you know, it's still in the works. Because there's always more features to added to it. And in general, if you want to make a difference between HTML4 and HTML5, in the HTML4, we have a tendency to put the div tag. In the HTML5, we have [INAUDIBLE] tags-- header, navigation, article, section, aside, footer, and so forth. That's basically what it is.

Going back to my lesson-- so here is an example of a basic HTML structure. So you have the exclamation doctype first. That's the first thing that you see here, the first line. This pretty much tells the browser that the specification in this case that should be used in this case would be HTML file. That's what it means.

And then you have the root tag, which is HTML. And then you have the head tag, which represents some metadata information that you put. And then so the meta could be a character set, UTF-8, and then the title, and so forth. And then you have the basically title. Titles are typically recommended for search engines. And then you have the link. See this link here that you see. This link element, which is represented by the link tag, what it does, it pretty much creates a relation or a link in this case of the document with another document-- in this case, would be a link to the styles.css.

And then, of course, here, we have a link. We have the href. The href actually specifies the destination in this case of the link, which happens to be the styles.css file. And then after that, you have the script tag. The script tag basically tags that you see here. They include a dynamic script, which is basically a JavaScript in this case and represented by the src, which is the source here attribute that says it's the JavaScript called script.js that is being used in this case. And then, of course, the body would be representing all kinds of information, like in this case a h1 header a file and then paragraph and some comments, whatever you want to put.

So this is pretty much how an HTML document would look like. So you got, in this case, a header. And this would be a header and footer representing the header and the footer of the page, information that goes at the beginning and the end of your page. And then after that, you have, in this case, a section. A section can always contain more than one section-- header, article, footer, header, article, footer, and so forth.

And then you have, in this case, also the navigation. And navigation basically allows you to kind of navigate within the page. And then the aside-- the aside would be any type of information that is on the side. Could be, by the way-- navigation contains navigation links. And then the aside would be any type of a content that represents, for example in this case, a sidebar, advertising, and so forth. That's basically what it is.

And we'll see an example about that. And this would be, in this case in section, where pretty much you have in this case different paragraphs and different sections and so forth. And that's how it, in this case, it would look like when you run it in its own page. That's what you see. So that's what you have over there. And we'll look at this example later on a little bit. Right now, let's just go back and continue with our lesson.

So now we're going to [INAUDIBLE]. You can go ahead and look at it and then just kind of look at the HTML5. Exactly what I showed you here-- look at the HTML5 here versus what you have in the preview, basically in the HTML [INAUDIBLE] that you have here. And basically, the tags are kind of similar to the HTML4, too. And now continuing with our lesson, now we're going to look at the HTML forms. This is pretty much to read from forms and validate HTML form input and sending data from a form.

So here's an example of a form that you see here. And of course, the form always has, in this case, have a name and then required, by the way, that means for validation. You are required that a name must be entered, an email must be entered. The phone is, as you see, there's no required over there. That means it's not a required. Then you don't have to put a phone. The abstract is required, on the other hand. And then the Browse what allow you to browse and choose wherever files that you want to, in this case, attach or submit. And then click on Submit.

So if you take a look here, you have basically looking at this form, we would be represented with this a code that you see here. And so you have the form that the form tag specifies the form that contains controls for collecting user input that can be, in this case, submitted to the server. And of course, in this case, you do have a form. And then you have an action. So you have a form name here, proposal form. And then you have an action in this case.

And the action attribute basically specifies the URL of the script that will process the form. And in this case, we use the hash sign or the pound sign that you see here. And I'm just circling it around with my, in this case, pointer. What it means is that leads to the same page. The has sign means it leads, it stays in the same page. That's what it means.

And then of course a form, when you look at it here, pretty much inside the form, you have what we call a fieldset. Fieldset, what it does, it actually groups a bunch of tags related from controls and labels. So here, for example, you have eight groups in this case. And they have the form, the fieldset from here all the way to here. And it has, in this case, a paragraph. And by the way, we can look at it also within the example.

And if I scroll down here, I see a form. So you see that in this case, a form starts here and then ends there. And it's made a fieldset, which contains in this case, a group of related form controls and labels that we see over there. So I have a label, which is for name, in this case, name and which is required. And then we have, in this case, a control, which is the input text that allows you to input, in this case, the name. That's what we have over there.

So a label represents a caption. And then, of course, the input or text area would be a controls can be written as descendants of labels and so forth. And so that's basically what we have here. So the input basically tag has several types in HTML5. And here, we have a text. And we can also have here a type email. We can have here a type telephone. And we can have here a type, in this case, file and so forth. That's basically what you see here. And then, of course, if you take a look at your book, in this case, you will see that you have all kinds of types.

So if you take a look at your book, pretty much we specify the different types that you can have-- hidden text, telephone, URL, email, password, date, time, number range, color, checkbox, and so forth. That's basically summarized here, just so that you guys can, in this case, look at them. So that's why I wanted to share with you watching your student guide so that you can go ahead and make use of it. OK? All right.

And by the way, whenever you work-- so pretty much, you can also work with input attributes. And the input attributes now, what you can do is you can go ahead and specify that it's going to be a five-- text. But in addition, you are going to specify the maximum length, which means you can enter a text over there but it shouldn't be more than 30 characters, as an example. OK? Or you can go ahead and specify that I have an input text. And then that contains you cannot write here, but then it's a read-only, as an example.

You can also make use of a list-- lists with this attribute. Again, this will be defining to some predefined options. And this list basically would be a data list with an ID suggestions. And it has the options that either maybe this entry or the other one, which means when you click, you have in this case, a drop-down where you can select from anywhere you want. OK?

You can also have a placeholder. Here is an example of a placeholder. Placeholder basically has tendency to specify how you are going to or how do you want or how do they want you to represent or enter your data, like an email would be email@ and then example.com as an example. So a placeholder basically with this attribute, either the input now has a pre-filled type of a value that disappears as soon as you start typing inside, but pretty much guide you how you are going to write that data inside that field. OK? All right.

Now what we could do is also, we can go ahead and specify, in this case, the validation. Validation is, for example, if you remember, we use the required, in this case, attribute, which means if we do not enter, in this case, a name and you tried to submit, you will get the-- in this case, the rectangle would become red, which means there is an issue in this case. There's a problem, and it needs to be fixed. That's what it means.

And let me just show you an example about that. So for that, let me go back to my, in this case, my HTML and then go back to the next one, which is, in this case, the form validation. And in form validation here, if you take a look at my form, you go down here. And then under the form here, you have, in this case, an action, which basically stays within the same page. We're not going anywhere. And then here under the field search, we have an input. And then we specify that the input is required-- same thing with an email.

And then here, we're specifying that the telephone number should follow this pattern, which is, again, some digits followed by that followed by some digits followed by [INAUDIBLE], kind of similar to what you see here-- a placeholder. And then the abstract here is also required, where we put required here.

So now if we take a look at-- if I run this, let me run it in it's on page. And then if I now, for example, put a name, in this case Joe, and then in this case, Joe whatever-- Smith. And then in email, I'm not going to fill up anything. And then the phone number here also, I'm not going to follow these-- maybe just put some numbers here. And let's see if it's going to [? scream. ?] And then I would not put anything in the abstract.

You see? The minute I clicked on that, it just gave me the red, which means I'm not following what they want me to do. So that's why it says between parenthesis, put in a number, space, and then three numbers, and then dash, and then four numbers. And then if I also didn't put anything in the abstract, if I click on Submit, you see it tells me that there's required email and that you need to put down and then there's a required abstract.

- Now as you see here in my form, if we take a look at my form here, in the form, I did not make it required, which means if I don't fill it up, that's OK. Nothing will happen. That's what it means.

All right, so this is just to guide you about the input validation, so which means it guides you how you enter your data inside the form. That's kind of nice to see that. All right. Let's continue.

And of course, in general, when you send the data to a form, in general, you specify the action. Here, what we did is to specify the action he's going to call a servlet called the FormSubmissionServlet, which is under the J console folder. The name is [INAUDIBLE]. And then the method we decide is going to post. Because we are sending data out that we enter in the form. And then, of course, we have the, this case, the encoding type. And here, which is basically then going to equal the multipart form data. This actually will specify the structure of the data will be converted to. And the type of encryption is always used when you are sending, in this case, binary data.

So, of course, there is a new attribute, in this case, in the input file element, which is multiple, in this case that you see here. And this multiple, again, when you said this attribute, you can select and send multiple files. That's what it means. So here, we have fieldset. And we enter name and then email and all of that. And also, we can go ahead, in this case, and inside the input type file. And this represents, in this case, the Browse button. But when you click, you can browse and choose more than one file and submit more than one file. That's what it means-- or send more than one file-- and then the Submit button that you see here.

Let's go ahead and see this example just so we can understand this. This would be the third one that we see here. Let me go back here and look at the Submit submission. So you see now I have my form here. And it's calling a servlet. So this servlet is this one here. So we already gave you a servlet because servlets are actually covered in another course. Towards the end of the course, I'll tell you about these courses that cover these separate components.

So here, we do have a servlet called FormSubmission. And that's the one that we are calling inside my, in this case, a submit. That's the action that we see here inside my form. And that's calling this servlet. This servlet basically is a web servlet. It is of multipart config, which means, in this case, can go ahead and work with multipart. And then it has a process request, in this case, that we'll go ahead and get the content type and set the printer output and then the HTML file document, and then pretty much in this case, get the parameters from the request from the form and then print them out, in this case, for me-- get them, get basically the object, the first name, the field, the field value, and again, go ahead and print that and then get also the name of the files that we are and print them out.

And here's the get file text. That pretty much in this case gets the file part and then get the file contents and scan-- create a scanner in this case upload text and then use the delimiter in this case and print. So this is pretty much what we have. And we have to doGet and the doPost that call, in this case, the process request.

So now if I go ahead and run this in it's own and then I'll just go out and say, OK, it's Joe Smith-- oops, Smith. Email required is jh@example.com. Telephone is 310-345-example. And then here is my abstract. So all of this is picked up by the servlet because we're reading it. And then in browser, go ahead and basically, in this case, open this file. And then I click Submit.

This goes to the servlet. And see-- it gets me all of this information that I-- and this is based on the fact that my servlet will get all of those-- reads all of this from the request in an enumeration and then prints all that information here. And that's what I see here. So I see, in this case, my email, my telephone, my abstract, the submit, and then, of course, the file that I just submitted in this case,

If I click go back-- oops, yeah, of course here. I don't have that because I need more than that to be able to get that. And that's basically what it is here. So this is just showing us, in this case, on how we can submit a form to a servlet, which returns, in this case, the information and prints it out rather to the, in this case, to the browser. And that's what I see here. All right, so that's the example that we want to show you on how to submit a form. And you guys can try this later on, just so you can see basically, understand the machinery part of it in this case.

All right, and pretty much we ask you now to kind of go through the examples. I went through all of them. And now what we're going to do is discuss a little bit the concept of controlling HTML5 events with JavaScript using, again, writing the onClick events and so forth. So here, we're going to look at an example. So just following the discussion, in our case here, so following the discussion is when, in our case here, event handles are happening in HTML5, we should be able to have a way or a mechanism by which we can go ahead and control these HTML5 events with JavaScript.

And for that, basically the HTML5 application can detect events. And that is by clicking on the mouse in this case. And by clicking in your mouse, you will go ahead and call, in this case, a JavaScript function. And the way pretty much we handle these events in HTML5, we have three ways to do that. The first one is we can use the event handling inside the HTML elements using the attribute in this case. For example, in my section ID, in this case, my section ID, section one, I have an onClick. And when I click on it, it will call a show speaker banner.

I will go ahead and show you that. And for that, I go back, and in this case, click on the HTML5 events. And let's just take a look at that. Oh, so you see, the first in this case, the first, in this case, message that we see here is window load event list not filed. The reason why we have this is because in JavaScript, we said that whenever a page is loaded, then there will be a function that will send us an alert that says, in this case, a Windows load event list not filed. And that's exactly what happened.

So when I run this, then you see, I find it. It's loaded. And now I get that alert. And now what we do is [? my ?] index.html inside, in this case, the section one, in this case, which is this one here. When I click on section one, it should call, in this case, a function called ShowSpeaker. And I click on section one, in this case, a part, in this case, which is a speaker, it should call a ShowSpeaker banner. And the ShowSpeaker banner is written here that will put an alert for us on the window that says this year will have the best speaker. So let's go ahead and click on that. Boom.

And you see? Now it's there. Why? Because we said when you click on that section one, which is the speakers, you get that. OK? Let's continue with that. And now let's continue with our lesson.

And now we're going to look at the second way to do that is basically have your event handling from JavaScript itself. So in JavaScript, I say get element by ID. Get me the section two ID. And I can see it here as an example. So in here, I have a section two ID, in this case, which are represented by the ID section two that I see here. And what I did here in my JavaScript, I said, OK. Get this element by the section two. And when I click on section two, that ID, I should be able to, in this case, called the showWorkshopBanner. This showWorkshopBanner is this one here that pretty much will give me this alert that says, our workshops are real hands-on.

And if I do this, that's exactly what happened. Look at that-- boom. And now I see, our workshops are real hands on. Because I said get the element by the-- except that I did it inside the JavaScript, inside the JavaScript code that you see here. All right, so that's what it is. And then of course, this caused a show a workshop. And that pretty much gives me that alert.

Let me go back to my lesson. And now, the next way or the next, if you want, way to add event handling to HTML5 elements is using the event handling by adding that event handler, so in a sense attaching an event listener to the HTML element. Now what we like about the third approach is that with this approach, an unlimited number of events can be attached to any single element. So for example, here in this example, we have two examples of add event listener. So we have event listener on the window that will go ahead and, when the window is loaded, which is a browser, the window load, an event listener alert is created. Or here, I'll go ahead and get the element by ID had a proposal and add an event listener to it by clicking on it. It will call the ShowAbstract banner, which we see here.

So here, I have the get element by ID had proposal. And then when I add an event listener to it, so I already saw the first event listener. And by clicking on it, it will call the ShowAbstract banner, which basically will go ahead and give me this here. So I will go down to my header proposal, in this case. And you see-- it says don't miss the opportunity to present your next big idea. And it's here basically. That's what you see here. OK? All right.

Let me go ahead and put it back to its original state. OK. And this is showing the example on how actually, in this case, we have three different ways to add event handling. And we just showed you three different ways to add event handling to HTML5 elements, either by, in this case, having the event handler set as attributes to the HTML elements or by having the event handler from the JavaScript-- we showed that-- and then by attaching event listener to the HTML element. And we also saw that as an example.

Let me go back to my lesson. And of course, this will give you-- you can go ahead and spend some time here and just to play with it the way I showed you that-- going to try it. Now what we're going to do is take a look at the document object model. Now the document object model, what it does, it actually shows us, in this case, what we have here is basically refers to the conceptualization of a document and its contents, which pretty much gives us the structure of that document. So in general in HTML5, you have your HTML type, which is the root, [? a tag. ?] And underneath, you have that head, [? a tag. ?] Underneath, you have title, meta, and all the metadata type of a-- links and so on, link, and script and so forth.

And then inside the body, you can have some headers that could be H1, H2, and so forth. Underneath, you can have navigation. Navigation can have, in this case, some listings and so forth. And then you can have-- the body can have sections that can have articles and headers and paragraphs. And it can have a side with headers, paragraphs, and footers with headers and paragraphs-- this pretty much showing you the DOM tree, more or less. OK? All right.

And that's basically what we have here. So of course, in general, when you now look at, in this case, a DOM tree, you have, for example in this case, the [INAUDIBLE] nodes. And the DOM tree includes different kind of nodes, the most common of which are the document type, the node, the element node, the text nodes, the comment nodes, and so forth. So here, for example, I do have, in this case, the HTML, which underneath we have head and then underneath, we have a title, meta, link, and script, and so forth. OK? All right.

And we can see these, by the way, as an example. Let me just show you that. So I go to my section here, which has this. And then in this case, I can go ahead and run it in its own page. And then underneath here, if I now do, in this case, go under Tools, and then Developer and then Firebug and open, then in this case, I can go ahead and look at the HTML. And see the HTML5, in this case, have some header, information, and some body, which has section and so forth.

So here, I can see the structure of my, in this case, document, which is HTML, has HTML [INAUDIBLE]. And then after that, you have the header, information. And then, of course, after that, you have the body. That is made of sections-- section one, section two, section three. That's what we have here.

And so this is pretty much showing you how you can go ahead. And by the way, you can go ahead, in this case, and under the console, you can go ahead and if I just go back down here and then just kind of go through the-- you can copy and paste some of these and just to kind of see. Let me just show you that. So I do have this. And then under [INAUDIBLE] open file [INAUDIBLE], I can go ahead and look, for example here, about document, firstChild.nodeName. I just want to see what's there.

So if I copy this and then put it into the run here and paste it and then click on Run, this pretty much gives me that the firstChild here would be HTML. That makes sense in this case as an example. And I can go ahead and try different things here.

So let me do a Control tab and go back to my lesson and continue. So this is pretty much what we were showing you here. And of course, in this case in general, you have properties or attributes of a node object. So in general, you have node type, which is a numeric code that typically is given, in this case associated with the node type. Here, we see a table that pretty much gives us, in this case, the type of node, which would be an attribute, and then the node name, attribute name, CDATA for a common data-- CDATA section, comment, a document fragment, document, document type, element, and so forth.

And then you have the, in this case, the node type. And in the node type here, you pretty much have a table that pretty much, in this case, that shows you the nodes that are identifiable through the node type-- attribute node, which is a constant name. And the node type is attribute. And then also, every one of them has a, in this case, an assigned short value. For the attribute , it's two. For CDATA it's four. For comment, it's eight. For document fragment, it's 11. Document type is 10 and so forth. The element is one and so forth.

And of course, the element node is built on the top of the node object. For example here, we do have HTML underneath. And so the tag name is the attribute of an element node that contains the name of the element. And then the methods of the element node are get attribute, set attribute, remove attribute, get element by tag name. They're all in the book.

All right. So we can look at it as you see here. And then we can look at, in this case, at specifying, for example. Let's just use an example. And for that, let me just go back to my, in this case, my lab machine and then just kind of see some examples that I can use here to just find out what I can get from these. For example, here I can say, document get element by ID section one. And let me just clear this guy here and paste it here and see where it gets me. And I clear here and run it. And I get me my section one ID, as you see here. So you can try these later on if you want.

You also have the other element nodes. And this can represent, for example, an attribute node. Attribute nodes are not considered independent nodes in the DOM tree. And they are part of the element object. And for example here, you have the doctype node, which is HTML and node text. You can also have a node attribute-- in this case, style. In this case, the HL style.css and rel, in this case, which is stylesheet, as in this case, as an example. And of course, here you can go ahead and try. Let me just go back and try some examples here.

So for example here, I can go ahead and get specific attributes with the get attribute [INAUDIBLE] example. So I copy this guy here. I clear this one here. Let me cleared it and clear, of course, the console, too, and then paste it here and run it. And that would give me my style sheet. Because the rel is a set to stylesheet. We know about that. And that's what we see here. Rel is the stylesheet. That's what we have over there.

So you can try these. The window object, by the way, represents the browser window itself that contains the DOM document. It needs a JavaScript to global object. That's what it is.

And now let's take a look at the accessing and manipulating elements. So it turns out that DOM allows us to alter the structure of a document and create a new element and add, edit, or remove the nodes of a tree. So we can go ahead, in this case, to add a node to the DOM tree, is to again, a couple of steps, create a new element and after that, insert the element into the node tree. So here's an example where, in this case, we create a new element, in this case, which happens to be a paragraph with p from the document. This will get me a new paragraph element. So I assign that to a new paragraph element that you see here.

I create a text variable. This is a new text. And then I go ahead and use that text to create a text node. So I have my text node. And then I append the text node to my new paragraph. I can use replaceChild. I use the new paragraph to replace the current paragraph. I can remove a child by just passing the current object. Or I can go ahead and clone. In this case, clone is use the current paragraph and click and pass through to it to, in this case, clone it.

So let me just show you this example about that. So let me go back. And then from the event, I'll just showing you the DOM manipulation, and of course, click on F12 to close that. So here's is a very good example where, in this case, I have maintext.html, which represents this current page. But watch carefully what we do when, in this case, call some JavaScript classes.

So here, we are calling some JavaScript code called the code.js, which is this one here. And then it has a function called Replace Text. So in this case, we'll go ahead then call the Replace Text. And this will go ahead and replace the text that we have here. So in this case, we have a P1 as an, in this case, an ID, in this case, a document ID-- in this case, the element ID, if you want. And it says this is the original text, which is this one here that you see.

And then now when I click on it, this will go ahead and replace call the Replace Text. When it calls the Replace Text, what it does, it actually first creates a paragraph, a new paragraph element. And then it creates a text and use the text to create a new text element. And then we'll go ahead then append that to the new paragraph, which means, in this case, it's going to create that. And then of course, after that, so that's what it's going to do.

And then now here, I'll go ahead then call the replace a text. So Replace Text, in this case, what it does-- so that you see here. So we'll go ahead and create the append to new paragraph and then get the element by ID P1, which in this case, would be this one here. This is the original text.

And then what it does, in this case, you will go ahead and, in this case, call get the parent node and then use the Replace-- a JavaScript replace function that is going to replace the current document, which is this one here, with a new one, which is in this code. This is a new text. So if I click on Replace, that's exactly what I get. See-- now it's a new text.

Let's continue with this example. Now in the next one, I have a second document element, which is represented by P2 ID. And it's called this is the original text, which we see here. But this time, I'm going to call a function called remove text. Let's see how it's implemented. This is a JavaScript function.

So Remove Text, what it does, it [INAUDIBLE] get the element by ID, which is the current paragraph, and then get the parent node from there. And then we'll go ahead and do that, remove that current one. So if I now click on Remove, this should be removed. Let's see if that happens. Yup, that's it. It's all gone. Let's continue with this.

And now what we're going to do is use the next one, which is a duplicate. So here, when I click Duplicate, it should be duplicating this. Let's see. So we have a P3, which is this is the original text. And then now if I click on Duplicate, it's going to get the element by ID and then go ahead and duplicate that. And so we'll go ahead and clone that. And then we'll go ahead and get the parent node and then pass the clone by appending it to it. So it's going to clone this guy here and add it and the bottom. And that's exactly what happened.

Let's go ahead and look at the other one. And so we did the Duplicate. Now we're going to insert before. When I click on the Insert, it should be inserting something before list here. Oh, I already did it. So let's just go ahead and click, in this case, on the code, and JavaScript code. So we get element by ID p in this case, which is this one here, in this case.

And of course, this is a new text-- create a new text. And then after that, get the element [INAUDIBLE] 3. So that will go ahead and then get the parent node and then insert before. So it's going to insert the new paragraph before this one. And that's exactly what happened. They inserted it before.

All right. So that's basically what we have here. And we can do it inside a new. And we can do the same thing here. See, replace that and move this guy here, duplicate underneath, and insert before. And it's going to insert it before. And that's what we have here as an example. That's kind of nice, to see all of this working very nicely.

And that pretty much, in this case, what they want us to do in this lesson. And so we just went through the example. You guys also can try it so you can just see how it works-- and did some websites for help. And then summaries-- we created HTML documents. We created forms and form inputs and validation. And we wrote JavaScript functions for HTML events. And then we finished by manipulating HTML5 elements. And here, we're going to write some JavaScript code to modify elements. So that's the practice. Practice would be this one here.

So it would be this practice here. That's on number four. We're still doing practices on the, in this case, the J console. So it would be this one here. It happened that this one here has some instructions. And so they tell you what to do with practice A1 and then practice two and then practice three and then practice four. This would be good questions that you need to think about-- and practice five and then six and seven. Six and seven-- actually, seven will kind of give you the hint that how to answer those in five.

And by the way, we give you a solution for all of this here basically. But we want you to try it one by one. It's kind of simple. It's not really-- it's not that difficult. So we want you to try it. And so that would be, of course, your practice for the lesson. Try it and then we'll take a look at it later on.

And that's pretty much what I wanted to say about in this lesson. This pretty much ends the concept of lesson four. Thank you.

## 2. JavaScript and HTML5: Develop Web Applications Ed 1 - 14m

Now that we're done with the lecturing of Lesson 4, let's go in and take a look at these practices. They're all under the JS console, where we write JavaScript code to modify document elements. We're back to the lab machine, and look at the JS console. The last one here would be under Lesson 4-- we click on Practice Manipulate HTML element, and that's what we find. Turns out that here, we have the preview, and then we look at the instructions. In the preview, it's an index.html that does have here a table with an IdP one that has some text-- this is some text to replace.

And then, for Practice 2, we'll have in this case some text to remove. For this one here, "this is some text." For P3, for P4, "this is some text." For P5, "this is some text to clone." For P6, "this is some text to move," and for the last one, "this is some text," and that's what we see here. All right, so now what we are going to do is pretty much read the instructions. So starting with Practice 1, here it says in the Preview window there is a paragraph labeled Practice 1, which we see here. Practice 1, which is this one here, with some text.

Here again, in this case, we have a T1, and then "this is some text to replace" that we see here-- some text to replace. What they want us to do is write some JavaScript code in the code.js, which is this one here, to replace paragraph P1 with a new paragraph element and each text, which is a new text. That's basically what we're going to do. So in that case, in the code.js, which is under Practice 1 here, that's pretty much where we are going to write, in this case, the code.

What we're going to do now is write that code. The code that basically wrote is this one here where it's similar to what we have done before in the lesson when we were learning about that, so that's the one that we are going to do. Here we do have, in this case, we created a new paragraph element and we created a text. We went ahead and created a new text element by passing the text to it. After that, we append that to the new paragraph element. All what I'm going to do now is add this code here.

In this case, pretty much we have a get element by ID, which is P1, which is this one here. And then a use/replace child-- you replace child a function by passing the new paragraph element, which I already have in this case that has "this is a new text." Then with paragraph P1 which basically, in this case, means that this is the paragraph I don't want to change. Let me just preview this. That's the code that we wanted to run, and let's go on and try and see what happens. I'll go ahead and click, and boom, now it's replaced with the new "this is a new text."

In the next practice, they want us now to go to the paragraph labeled Practice 2, which is this one here. Then they want us-- which is this one here that says "this is some text to remove." Then what we are going to do here is write some Java code to remove that Paragraph 2 and its text. This is pretty much what I have done here. This is the code that we need, and we'll go ahead and just put it down here.

We don't need the comment anymore, so we go ahead and get the element by ID. Now what we do is [INAUDIBLE] to parent node, amd then go ahead and remove that paragraph 2-- which is, again, this case represented by the ID2, this one here. OK, let's go ahead now, and so that's how we write that. Let's go on to look at the preview, and let's what happened to this one. So I'll go ahead in this case and execute it. And boom, now it's gone. Now let's take a look at the next practice.

Here, they want us to take a look at that paragraph labeled Practice 3 on the text, which basically represents "this is some text" which we see here. What they want us to do is write some JavaScript code which appends the new paragraph element with its text new to the paragraph P3, that's what it's going to do. Let's go in and take a look at that. This would be in-- Practice 3 would be this one here. This is pretty much what we've done-- what we did here. We'll just go ahead in this case and use this code. Let's go ahead and put it down here.

That's basically what we're doing here, so we'll go ahead in this case and get element by IBP3, which happens to be-- in this we have this one here, "this is some new text." That's what we have. And then of course, again the parent node, and append the child in the new paragraph. That's basically what we're doing. So we're appending that to P3. Let's go ahead and see if that actually works. Boom, you see how we appended to that to the "this is some text."

After that, we go to Practice number 4. In Practice number 4, what we have done-- and if you take a look at this in a preview-- you see that pretty much the one that is in Practice 1 is just vanished, so we don't see it anymore. Now it has moved to this section here, Practice 3, and we don't see the "this is a new text" that we replaced in Practice 1. Now it's gone-- interesting. Let's take a look at why.

Here we said, OK, we have now a paragraph next to Practice 4, which is this one here. So we write some JavaScript code that inserts the new paragraph element, and this new text before Paragraph 4-- that's what happened. Let's do that. This would be-- and then after that, we'll answer these two questions. Let's go ahead and do that-- so here it is. We'll go ahead and put down this in under number 4. There it is. And let's get rid of this comment-- I don't need it any more. They get element's by IdP4, which is this one here. Some text. We'll go ahead in this case and insert the new paragraph before P4.

As you see, we are always working with this new paragraph element here, so let's go and do that. So take a look at that-- keep an eye-- this is basically the new paragraph element that you see here. Now if I execute this, look what happened. I want to insert it before this text, but look what happened, folks. Boom. Suddenly it vanished from 3, and now it came in before the text in number 4. The question that we have here is, why not the new paragraph disappears from 1 when we executed-- when we saw Practice 3, and now he disappeared from Practice 3 when we saw Practice 4?

The reason why is because this new paragraph element that we've seen, we kept on moving it-- that's all we did in this case. So in Practice 3, we moved the new paragraph before Paragraph 3, which means it vanished from Practice-- in this case-- 1. In practice 4, we now want to insert it before the text in Practice 4, and then of course, we moved it now in this case from the Practice 3 area to Practice 4, and that's exactly what happened here.

Let's continue with these instructions. Now next in Practice 5, they want us to look at that paragraph in Practice 5 label, which is now in this case here. This is some text to clone. What they want us to do is write some JavaScript code, but clone this paragraph P, and add the cloned paragraph as a sibling to P5. Let's take a look at how we do this. Here it is. Let's go ahead and put it here under A5.

First, we get the element by ID, which is 5, which is this one here. After that, we'll go ahead and clone that paragraph, and then append it to the cloned one. That's pretty much what we did. Let's go ahead and try this and see that happens. I don't need this anymore. Then I'll go ahead and run it, and that's exactly what happens. See? It's cloned. And added, in this case. And then, going back and looking at Practice 6-- in Practice 6, which is the basically this one here, "this is some text." Here we do have two paragraphs in Practice 6, and that's what we have here.

Practice 6, we have this one here-- P6-1 and P6-2 as IDs. And they want us to write some Java code that moves P6-1 that comes after P6-2. Now we want one after there, so we want to move this after this one here-- this after this one here. That's what we want. Let's go ahead and look at how we actually do that. Going back to my 6, and basically I don't need this anymore. I get the element by ID-- 6P1, save it into here.

After that, get element 6P2, and then parent node, and then append to it the 6-1. That's basically what we did. If we run this, take a look carefully at what happened here. We just keep it highlighted. You see now the P1 moved after the-- rather, the P2 moved after the P1 that you see here. The last exercise, which is number 7, they want to switch basically representing this text here-- "this is some text--" they want us to write some Java which appends the new text element-- only the text node without the paragraph-- to the element P7, which means we do not want to append the new paragraph element, but just the text itself.

And that's easy, so one way to do it is this way. This code here. Which I'm going to put down here under A7, and then I don't need this comment anymore. Here we get the element by IdP7, which is this one here-- that you see here. Then after that, because we just wanted to append to it just a text node. So I create a text node on the document, and then append it to P7. That's exactly what's going to happen, so let's go ahead and do that, and that's what you see. Now we appended it right after it.

That's what we wanted to do in these practices. But the last exercise, which is 7, pretty much shows us how we're not working with that paragraph element anymore, which is this new paragraph element, but instead, we're just working with text, and that's all. That's why we created the text that you see here, and then we just append it directly to P7. That's what you see here in the preview That's pretty much what we wanted to do in these practices. Thank you.
