# 2: Introducing the Java Technology

1. Introducing the Java Technology, Part 1 - 40m
2. Introducing the Java Technology, Part 2 - 19m
3. Practices for Lesson 2 - 28m

## 1. Introducing the Java Technology, Part 1 - 40m

We're going to look at identifying different Java technology groups. We then get into describing examples of how Java is used in applications, as well as a consumer products. We also get into describing the benefits of using an integrated development environment IDE. In our particular case, folks, we're going to use the Oracle NetBeans, which by the way, supports the Java SE 7, the current spec, the latest one.

I just want to pass information, extra information, just to let you know that the Java SE 7 was introduced on the 7th of July, 2011. Continuing with the concept, we're going look at the concept of developing classes and describing how to declare classes. We're going to look at the concepts of analyzing a business problem, and to recognize objects and operations that perform the building blocks of the Java program design.

We'll get into the concept of the term object, folks, and what doesn't it mean, and it's relationship to the class. So in a sense, what we are going to do is we are going to get into learning about these Java classes that play the role of what we call the blueprint. And from these blueprints, we'll go ahead and instantiate, we're going to learn the word instantiate, objects of type that class or creating objects of type that class. We're going to look at the concept of writing simple Java program that compiles and runs successfully. We're going to look at the concept of declaring an initializing variables in Java.

We're going to look at the difference primitives that are types in Java. It turn out that there are eight primitives in Java. We're going to look at them, and by the way, we're going to make the difference between the Java primitives and the Java objects. So there will be variable representing primitives, but then there will be the reference variable representing, of course, references to objects, and we're going to make the difference between the two.

Instantiating an object and effectively using objects reference variables, that's what we are going to look at. And of course, we're going to look at the concept of operators in Java, loops in Java, like the for loop, the while loop, the do/while loop, and so forth. And of course, we going to look at the decision constructs, the if/else and the switch states, [INAUDIBLE], and so forth. And we also are going to get into declaring and instantiating arrays and array lists, and be able to, of course, iterate through them.

We'll get into the Javadocs to look up the Java foundation classes. In a sense, we are going to learn how to look up any package or any class offered by the Java API, particularly the Java SE 7 API. We're going to get into declaring a method with arguments and return values. Of course, these methods, which by the way, it may be former languages that you folks learned, like C language and other the languages, maybe you called it functions. Sometimes we call them operations, but in Java, we have tendency to call them methods. Of course, these methods can take parameters and return values, and we going to learn how to actually put all of that in the Java syntax.

We also are going to make use of a very, very nice feature in the Java technology, and that's the concept of inheritance. Inheritance is very, very useful because it allows us to re-use the code again and again and be efficient in the way we write code. So we look at inheritance to declare and define a subclass for an existing superclass. We will also look at how we can handle errors in Java programs. Again, errors are quite important, and we'll see how the Java technology helps us handle those errors in a very, very friendly way. We'll get to that.

And of course, we finish by creating this application that we work with. And of course, once its all created, we should be able to deploy the application using our NetBeans IDE, the Oracle NetBeans IDE. So in general, this is just a rough time kind of schedule on what's going to happen, but of course, it all depends on how much questions you folks have and so forth. So in general, in day number one, we'll go through the introduction, then we get into the Java technology, and then thinking in objects, of course, finishing by introducing the Java language.

The second day, we look at declaring, initializing, and using variables. We also get into working with objects, and of course, we'll use the operators and decision constructs in the Lesson Seven. That would be day number two.

In day number three, continue with number seven by looking at the practice labs, of course, which is related to using operators and decision constructs. And then after that, we get into the concept of creating and using arrays, and of course, we get into lesson nine. That would be on day number three. We finish it by using the loop constructs in Java.

In day number four, we will look at working with methods and method overloading. Quite interesting topic, quite interesting concept in Java. We'll go ahead and learn about that. We'll also learn about encapsulation and constructors, which is, by the way, quite important in Java.

When we get there, we'll understand why do we need the encapsulation. And of course, how do we now make use of constructors in Java? Then we finish the day, which is day number four, by introduce some advanced object-oriented concepts in Java. We finish the course, which would be on day number five, by looking at handling errors and, of course, deploying and maintaining this nice application called the Duke's Choice application. We'll get to see it through all the different lessons in this particular course.

Everybody is following, folks? Good. Continuing with that, so again, this is just part of the facilities and all that. Again, the concept of names and all that, I already had a talk with you guys. So welcome everybody, and let's go ahead and look at the course environment.

In terms of the course environment, here's what we have, folks. We have the JDK, which is already installed, which is the Java SE 7, including the JRE 7 installed on your lab machines, so that, of course, is already done. We also have a browser, which is the Firefox, and reason why we use a browser in this particular course is so that we could look the Java documentation API. We also installed the NetBeans, and NetBeans is a very, very friendly, powerful IDE that is going to help you develop Java applications. When we get to that, I'll explain that concept.

We also have the Glassfish server, and the Glassfish server is an Oracle application server, and it's open source. Typically, it is the reference implementation for the spec, and right now, it is up to spec Java AE 6. Remember, folks, that right now, what we're learning in this course is the Java SE, standard addition, but the Java AE makes use of the Java SE. I'll just give you a tour on that, and of course, show you what is it that you guys need to look at when you're working with an application server.

Of course, many of you are learning this course so that he can get into the Java IE technology, and we have a bunch of good courses, and I will talk about them towards the end of the week. We also have the student guide, and there will be an extra student guide on your lab machine in addition to the eKit that you folks going, or you already, downloaded. We have an activity guide and practice files. Again, these are resources to use doing the practice portion of the course.

And of course, we have the Java API documentation and the Java language specification, which by the way, is already downloaded and installed on the system. You will take a look at it, just at some point in time. We will look at it just to have an idea how to look up classes in Java. These are classes that already provided to us by the Java API.

So in summary, what we have done here is we pretty much introduced to you the course, and hopefully, you are going to enjoy this Java SE 7 fundamentals, and yes, you are. You going to have a good time, and just watch it, folks. I'm going to quiz you. I'm just kidding. OK, continuing with that, let's go ahead, now, and look at introducing the Java technology.

In this lesson, we are going to describe the key features of the Java technology. We're going to describe and identify features of object-oriented programming, and we're going to discuss the difference between compiled and interpreted language. And we're going to also describe how to download and install the Java platform, and described how to run a Java application by using a command line.

We start, by the way, folks with the command line, and then after that, we'll move to the IDE. Why do we do that? So that will give you an opportunity to do everything by hand. As you know, IDEs have tendency to do a lot of things for us, so we want you to use an editor and write everything from scratch. And then after that, you will get to, again, work with an IDE, and of course, identify the different Java technologies.

So continue with that and now looking at the objectives. Again, continuing with the objects. We're going to relate Java with other languages. We're going to discuss the different IDEs that support the Java language, describe how to download and install an IDE, and describe every phase off the product life cycle.

So let's go, now, and start by looking at the key features of the Java and object-oriented programming, which is, by the way, as you know, we typically always say that Java is an object-oriented programming language, pure object-oriented programming language. Well, to put things in perspective, Java is single most widely-used development language in the world today, as you know. So some of the statistics that we give you here-- there are over 9 million developers saying they spend at least some of their time developing in Java according, of course, to the recent events data study. And of course, that's out of the world population of about 14 million developers. Well, that's definitely a huge number, as you know.

In terms of the looking at Java within the context of the desktop, there are about 1.1 billion desktops run Java, so there's, again, according to Nielsen online Gartner in 2010. There are also about 930 million JRE download a year. And of course, the JRE, which is the Java Runtime Environment, is used by the end users. And there are about 9.5 million JDK downloads a year, and of course the JDK stands for the Java Development Kit, which is used by all the Java developers. In fact, you folks are going to use in this particular course and in the next courses that you'll be taking in the future because, obviously, since you got into this course, then you folks are getting into learning Java to use it for your development and your careers.

And again Java is also used in the mobile phones. Again, on most smartphones run Java. Java, now, is included in the TV and card.

Right now, for example, we have the Java TV and the Java card technology, which is, again, used widely. There's about 100% of the Blu-ray players run Java. 71.2 million people connect to the web and Java-powered devices, and that's according to InStat 2010. And there are about 1.4 billion Java cards that are manufactured every year, and that's, again, according to the InStat in 2010.

Now, a little bit of story about Java. Well, Java is a programming language originated in about 1991, and it was part of a research project to develop programming language that would bridge the communication gap between many consumer devices, such as videocassette recorder, VCR, televisions, and so forth. A team of highly skilled software developers at Sun, which by the way, now, became Oracle, and that was called the Green Team, under the leadership of James Gosling, wanted to create this programming language that enabled consumer devices with different central processing units, CPUs, to share the same software enhancements. Again, the initial concept failed after several deals with the consumer device companies weren't successful.

Then after that, what the Green Team has done-- they pretty much were forced to find another market for the Java programming language, and that's where the beginning. It was just the introduction to the World Wide Web Consortium, and if you folks remember, there were, at the beginning, different type of technologies that were used, at that time, for the World Wide Web, and that's how it took off. After that, we got into the concept of creating applets that are run on the browser, and then after that, we created more web components, which are the servlets, and so forth. Just to note here, did you know the character in the slide, in Duke's Java mascot. Again, the original Duke was created by the Green Team graphic artist Joe Palrang.

Now, looking at the key concept of the Java programming language, folks, it is object-oriented, so we work with objects, and in fact, we're going to always, now, think objects. For those of us who have actually worked with the structure programming language, like a C language and Cobalt and other languages, obviously, that way of thinking, we should change it. We should think object, and that's what we're going to do the whole week. Just making sure that we understand this concept of object-oriented.

It is distributed. Distributed, in a sense that Java allows two applications talk to each other through the network, and we have a technology that was created at that time, which is called RMI. Anybody heard of RMI? Remote method invocation, and that's the one that allowed Java components interact with each other through the network. It is quite simple.

And the nice thing about Java is also multi-threaded, that's by nature. Multi-threading nature of Java made it really, really ahead of many, many languages in the market, and that's why Java won in the market. That's why millions and millions now use Java language. It's also secure, and is platform independent. Speaking of platform independent, let me just go ahead, now, on the board and put in a diagram just to show you what is typically known as the layer pattern in the Java AE technology, and you will get to actually look at this layer pattern when you get into Java EE technology, learning about enterprise applications.

So in general, folks, whenever we work with software, we always have to make sure that we have a hardware platform, a hardware machine, and I call it a hardware platform, HP, hardware platform. Of course, to be able to run or use this hardware, we need a piece of software that runs the hardware, which is typically called what? What is-- Somebody just mention it? OS system. The OS system.

And of course, if you want to work with the OS, and obviously, example of operating systems, the Oracle Solaris 11, the Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows OS, the Mac OS, and so forth. And of course, to be able to work with Java, what we need to do in this case, folks, is download a JVM and install it. Again, that's the JVM, which is the Java SDK that we installed here, 7. So these two together, the OS and the JVM, you need to install the JVM for a particular OS. Now, you need to download the one for Linux if you have a Linux OS, download the one from Windows if you have the Windows OS, download the one for Solaris if you have Solaris OS and so forth.

So these two together to, they call the lower platform. Let me just write it down in blue. It's called the lower platform. This is the hardware platform. This is called the lower platform, P for platform.

And then of course, in our case here, we are going to work with Java applications, but in general, let me just give you this for completeness, and then I'll explain to you that this, you will learn later on when you get into the Java AE technology. In general, once you install the JVM, you need, now, to install an application server, an app server. An example of an app server is the Oracle WebLogic app server, Oracle Glassfish app server, maybe the IBM WebSphere app server or the JBoss app server, and so forth. Or maybe you can install just a Apache web server instead of an application server. An application server has the web tier and the EJB tier, or the EJB container.

And this app server, here, is actually called the upper platform. Let me use the blue to write it down. It's called the upper platform.

Of course, every application server comes with its spec. The specification and the APIs and the frameworks, all of these are actually put on a layer by itself, which is, by the way, attached to the upper layer. I'm going to put that in orange. And that's, of course, where you have all the APIs, specs, and of course, frameworks. We going to see some frameworks when we use NetBeans.

All of this is called the virtual platform, P for platform. Why virtual? Because it changes.

Now, currently, we are a Java EE 6, which by the way, Java AE 7 is on the works. Should be out. It has, for example, the Java SE 7, plus you have the 3.0, JSF 2.0, and a bunch other ones, EJB 3.1 and so forth.

I'm going to represent this in brown, like beans, for example. On the top of that, you have your applications. This is what you are going to build, either pure Java classes-- which by the way, lots of times, we call them Java beans, or POJOs, plain old Java objects, or it could be also EJBs, enterprise Java beans, could be servlets, could be JSPs, could be JFs. You learn about all this technology in future courses that we offer.

So that's called the application platform. Application platform. Of course, in our particular course here, the Java SE fundamentals, we don't use these applications servers. We write pure Java code, and we run it directly on what? On the JVM. Right? But in the future, when you get into the Java technology, you would see these two layers. Right?

Let's continue, now, with the course, continue with the lecture. So again, this is the concept of procedural language, where in this case, the procedure programming language focuses on sequence. Step one, then step two, then step three, then so forth. So the Java programming language, on the other hand, folks, it's an object-oriented programming language because one of the main goals of the Java technology programmer is to create objects. Again, these are autonomous objects, or pieces of code, that typically do things for other objects or for themselves.

And by the way, this concept of object-oriented started with a similar, in about 1967, and then after that, we got through different type of steps. And at some point in time, we actually created the C++, which by the way, was coming from the C language to be able to convert the C language into an object-oriented programming language. And it did its job, but of course, it has a lot of disadvantages.

And throughout the course, whenever I talk about some of the concepts, I'll also mention-- How many of you have done C++? OK. I'll just mention what are the drawbacks of the C+ language compared to the Java language.

So we, now, make use of object-oriented concepts, folks, and let's go ahead and look, pretty much, at what it is. So what is the difference again? Object-oriented programming differs from the procedural programming because procedural programming typically stresses the sequence of coding steps required to solve a problem. On the other hand, object-oriented programming stresses for the creation and interaction of objects. So now, through object-oriented programming, we achieve modularity where the source code of an object can be written, and maintained, independently of the source for other objects, and of course, after it is created, an object can be easily passed around inside the system.

We also have the information hiding. Again in this case, by interacting only with an object's method, the details of its internal implementation remained hidden from the outside world, and when we get there, we'll talk about this concept of hiding, which by the way, we call it encapsulation. We'll get to that. We also have the code reuse. If an object already exists, then pretty much, you can use that object in your program, and this allows these developers to implement test and develop complex task specific objects, which you can then trust to run in your own code.

And of course, it has that plug ability and debugging ease, so in particular objects is found to be a little bit of a headache, if you can remove it from the application and plug it into other object as its replacement. So this is kind of similar to the concept of fixing a mechanic kind of problem, so you can always, if you have a headache with an object, you can always say, OK, this object is not good. Let me go ahead and take it out and put in a better object that actually works nicely.

It's like when you look at a mechanical problem, like in a car, for example, suddenly it's not starting. Most probably, it's the starter, it's a bad starter or alternator or whatever. We can take it out and put a new one, and boom, it's up and running. So that's what we want to do, folks. We went to mimic the concept of mechanical devices, or electrical devices, and so forth. So remember, we actually decided to treat Java, which is part of software engineering, as an engineering product.

So we put it in the same basket as civil engineering and mechanical engineering and electrical engineering. And the difference between the software engineering and the rest of these engineering fields, like civil engineering or mechanical engineering or electrical engineering, is that when you build an object, you can touch it. You can actually touch it, but on the other hand, software is intangible. It does something for you, but you cannot touch it. You cannot actually touch that object, so we need to remember that.

But the concept is the same, folks. We need to build objects and work with objects, and these objects interact with each other. For example, here, I have a main object, which interacts with this objects, that could interact with this object. Then I have this object, which interacts with this object, which by the way, this object will end up interacting with this object, and so forth.

And we said that Java programming language is a distributed language because the language provides support for distributed network technology. The API that helps us to do that is called remote method invocation. And of course, it was created right after the CORBA language. And let me go ahead, again, and put in a diagram next to that one on the board, so that I can tell you a little bit of history about what happened throughout the years.

So when TCP/IP got created, everybody was quite happy. Why? Because we can actually make two systems talk to each other and exchange data with each other, so everybody was quite happy with that. I don't know, how many of you have actually programmed some TCP/IP application using a C language? Anybody did that? So it's a little bit hard to work with.

And of course, at some point in time, we wanted to create a protocol that allow us to program application in any language we want, but still these applications can talk to each other through the TCP/IP protocol, and that, actually, was the concept of CORBA. And of course, in 1995, when Java became a mature, and then we started working with Java, that's what we said, OK, let's go ahead and create a-- By the way, the typical protocol for CORBA is IIOP, which stands for internet inter-op protocol. course, Java got created, create--

So when Java got into the picture, we wanted to create an equivalent type of protocol that allows Java components to talk to each other through the network, and that's where we created, now, the concept of RMI. And that's how we achieved that. And so that's pretty much why we say that Java is a distributed programming language.

Let's go ahead and continue with the lesson. So again we should know that the terms, Java technology and Java programming language, do not refer to the same thing. Java technology refers to the family of the Java technology products. On the other hand, the programming language is only one part of it.

And we said, folks, that Java is simple. The Java programming language is simple because the designers removed some of the complex and difficult type of programming constructs found in other languages, like for example, C language and C++. For example, the Java programming language does not allow programmers to directly manipulate pointers to memory locations. Again, instead the Java programming language allows programmers to only money manipulate objects using object references, and that's a huge plus.

In addition, if you work with a Boolean primitive variable, Java actually has the values of the Boolean as a true and false, the two strings true and false. On the other hand, other languages use zero and one. So in general, references are used instead of memory pointers, and that's a huge plus because, if you make use of memory pointers like in C and C++, if you want to work with object, particularly in C++, you need to allocate memory. Remember that? You need to allocate memory for that.

Once you finished with the object, before leaving you need to also do what? De-allocate the memory yourself. Otherwise, you're going to have a problem of what? Memory leaks. So Java actually has this nice garbage collector underneath that does all of that for you.

Again, the Boolean data type can have, now, a value of either true or false. And memory management, by the way, is done automatically through the garbage collector. And we also said Java is a multi-threaded type of language. It supports multi-threading, so it allows more than one task to happen at the same time. We gave you as an example, here on the slide, how for example, accessing a database and printing something and maybe creating some graphical user interface, all of that can actually happen at the same time, every one of them handled by a thread.

And we also said that the Java programs are secure because, pretty much, the Java programming language with the environment in which the Java technology program runs, uses security measures to protect your programs from attacks. Again, these typically include prohibiting distributed programs, such as applets, from reading or writing to the hard drive, or for computer, usually an applet always runs on the browser of your system and that's it. That's the concept of sandbox. Everybody heard if the concept of sandbox? That's what we have over there.

Also at some of the measures is very fine that all the Java programming language contains valid code. That's done through the byte code verifier. And of course, it can support digital signature if you want, and that's, of course, a Java technology code can be signed by a company or a person in a way that another person receiving the code can verify the legitimacy of the code, of course, prohibiting the manipulation of memory by using pointers. So all of these, of course, in this case, are advantages that Java has, and it made the Java code quite secure.

In terms of the platform and dependency, and I showed you the diagram earlier on the board, usually, we say Java is platform independent. And unfortunately, a language like C code is platform dependent. So in general, when you write a C language, and you want to run it on a Solaris platform or Linux platform or the Microsoft platform, what you need to do is you need to compile that into the binary code of the Solaris OS, or binary code under the Linux OS, or the binary code under the Microsoft.

And of course, the reason why we say a C language, for example, is platform dependent, is once you create your binary code, then when you need to do, now, is you link it to the OS that you're working with. So in this case, it would be either a Solaris linker, or a Linux linker, or a Windows Microsoft linker. And of course, what the linker does, it will go ahead and create for you, either a Solaris OS executable, or a Linux executable, or a Microsoft Windows executable. Everybody's following, folks? OK, good.

And of course, after that, once you have your Solaris executable, then you can run this only on what? On the Solaris workstation. The same thing if you have Linux executable, you can run it only on a Linux workstation. And if you have it in a Microsoft executable, of course, in that case, you can run it only on a Microsoft Windows station.

Well, folks, something that we do not have in Java, as you see illustrated on the diagram here on this slide, is that a Java technology program can run on several different CPUs and operating systems, like Solaris OS, and on a [INAUDIBLE] or Mac OS, on the Intel chip for Microsoft, on an Intel chip, and so forth. So in Java, what it does, it has this compiler, so the Java programs are compiled automatically if you compile them by the Java compiler. And usually when they're compiled, they're actually the result of the compilation will create file for you that are .class files. So these are, again, what we call bytecode instead of the CPU specific machine.

And of course, after the bytecode is created, it is now interpreted, or executed, by the bytecode interpreter, which is typically called the virtual machine. So the virtual machine is platform-specific program that understand the platform independent bytecode and executes that on a particular platform. That could be a Solaris platform or a Windows platform on a Linux platform and so forth. So for this reason, we say that the Java programming language is often referred to as an interpreted language, and of course, the Java technology programs are said to be portable, or executable on any platform. So for example, now, once you have your bytecode, then on that time, you can go ahead now and pretty much run it on either a Solaris workstation or a Linux workstation or the Windows workstation.

Of course, we should also mention that the Java technology programs needs more than just a Java virtual machine to execute. Again, a Java technology program also needs a set of standard Java class libraries for the platform. Java class libraries are libraries that pre-written code that can be combined with your core that you write on your application. Combined, the JVM software and Java class libraries are referred to, always, as the Java Runtime Environment.

Of course, the Java Runtime Environment are available from the Oracle and many common platforms. We should also note that some modifications might be required to make a Java programming platform. For example, a directory names might need to be altered so that they use the appropriate delimiters and so forth, for the underlying OS system.

Everybody is following, folks? Everybody's with me? Good.

So now, just for completeness, we have a small quiz, and this small quiz says "The Java programming language is said to be platform independent because" of what? We give you A, B, C, and D. Of course, if you take a look carefully, you see that A says "Compiled code runs on multiple platforms with few or no modifications," and of course, that would be the answer. OK? Good.

## 2. Introducing the Java Technology, Part 2 - 19m
## 3. Practices for Lesson 2 - 28m
